 
 
title:
The Anger Workbook
author:
Bilodeau, Lorrainne.
publisher:
Hazelden Publishing
isbn10 | asin:
1568380542
print isbn13:
9781568380544
ebook isbn13:
9780585195896
language:
English
subject 
Anger, Anger--Case studies, Anger.
publication date:
1992
lcc:
BF575.A5B55 1992eb
ddc:
152.4/7
subject:
Anger, Anger--Case studies, Anger.

Page i
The Anger Workbook
Lorrainne Bilodeau, M.S.
HAZELDEN®
INFORMATION & EDUCATIONAL SERVICES

Page ii
Hazelden 
Center City, Minnesota 55012-1076
©1992 by Lorraine Bilodeau. All rights reserved. First published by
Hazelden Foundation 1994 (originally published by CompCare
Publishers 1992). Printed in the United States of America. No portion
of this publication may be reproduced in any manner without the
written permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 1-56838-054-2
 

Page iii
To Mike and Elaine, two friends who were the victims of anger
gone awry.

Page v
Contents
Author's Note
Chapter One
Investigating Personal Attitudes about Anger
1
What Your Answers Show about Attitudes
8
Chapter Two
Taking a New Perspective on Anger
15
Anger Is a Feeling
16
Anger Is Not a Gigantic Mistake
17
Chapter Three
Acknowledging the Complexities of Anger
25
An Emotion Is Only One Element of a Process
25
How Anger Fits into the Process
29
Chapter Four
Understanding How Anger Goes Awry
37
How Emotions Become Distorted
37
Research about Destructive Anger
41
How Anger Becomes Destructive
42
 

Page vi
Chapter Five
Changing Your Experience of Anger
53
Relaxation
54
Emotions
55
Thoughts
71
Behaviors
82
Chapter Six
Responding to Another Person's Anger
89
Interrupting Expectations
93
Listening and Clarifying
94
Notes
99
Bibliography
103
About the Author
105
Journal Pages
107

Page vii
This guide is not meant to supplant professional counseling or
therapy. If you have destructive thoughts about yourself or someone
else, seek professional advice.

Page ix
Author's Note
The other evening I was sitting with some friends when the topic
turned to self-help books. As I expounded rather negatively on the
subject, I noticed that my friends were staring at me with puzzled,
curious looks on their faces. The light bulb went on, and I blurted out,
"God forgive me! I have written a self-help book."
Well, that's the truthalthough I do need to warn you: it is an
informational manual. You will not find soothing phrases that seem
immediately to elevate your mood. You won't find easy answers. And
you won't find a whole new you. You will find serious information
that explains anger and its uses. You will find a new perspective that,
along with a great deal of effort and honesty in working the exercises,
will help you change the way you experience and use anger.
There are many people I would like to blame for this overwhelming
endeavor. Instead I will do the polite, socially acceptable thing and
say thanks to the following:
Ray Matheson, who in 1982 asked me to do a workshop for
professionals entitled, "Working with the Angry Client." It was the
first time I had to present my ideas about anger in an orderly,
understandable fashion. I never suspected what would emerge from
that first workshop.
Ed Kavanaugh, Mindy Burgin-Debyshire, and Phyllis T. McCafferty,
who all took a risk to facilitate the "Encountering Anger" Clinic,
which put the theories of this manual to use.
Dan Scott, Susie Sheppard, Eric Van Quill, and Mary Netsley (the
counselors at Richmond Aftercare), who not only put up with me, but
supported and laughed with me through my periods of anxiety,

elation, and irritability.
Ruthy Kossove, who went out of her way to supply an essential piece
of reference material.
And special thanks to Carole Sutton, who said, "Write a manual. It's
easier than a book." (I really think it's the last time she'll utter those
words.) Her kindness, encouragement, and laughter kept me going.
 

Page x
Hazelden Publishing and Education is a division of the Hazelden
Foundation, a not-for-profit organization. Since 1949, Hazelden has
been a leader in promoting the dignity and treatment of people
afflicted with the disease of chemical dependency.
The mission of the foundation is to improve the quality of life for
individuals, families, and communities by providing a national
continuum of information, education, and recovery services that are
widely accessible; to advance the field through research and training;
and to improve our quality and effectiveness through continuous
improvement and innovation.
Stemming from that, the mission of the publishing division is to
provide quality information and support to people wherever they may
be in their personal journeyfrom education and early intervention,
through treatment and recovery, to personal and spiritual growth.
Although our treatment programs do not necessarily use everything
Hazelden publishes, our bibliotherapeutic materials support our
mission and the Twelve Step philosophy upon which it is based. We
encourage your comments and feedback.
The headquarters of the Hazelden Foundation is in Center City,
Minnesota. Additional treatment facilities are located in Chicago,
Illinois; New York, New York; Plymouth, Minnesota; St. Paul,
Minnesota; and West Palm Beach, Florida. At these sites, we provide
a continuum of care for men and women of all ages. Our Plymouth
facility is designed specifically for youth and families.
For more information on Hazelden, please call 1-800-257-7800. Or
you may access our World Wide Web site on the Internet at
http://www.Hazelden.org
 


Page 1
Chapter One 
Investigating Personal Attitudes about Anger
Recently a colleague observed that, if the world is destroyed, the
cataclysm will happen because intellectual growth has far outpaced
humankind's emotional development. People's inability to curb, or at
least control their emotions will lead to gross abuse of technology.
When I asked whether my colleague meant all feelings or just anger,
he thought a moment and responded, "Most feelings, but especially
anger."
In a way I agree with him. It is emotional immaturity that incites
destructive behavior. But I must take exception to his solution, the
curbing or controlling of emotions. This very approach to human
feelings has caused the problem. People make decisions and act on
feelings that they don't even know they have. This kind of behavior is
not emotional maturity, but its opposite. Emotionally mature people
recognize, understand, and use emotions in their intended functions.
As long as we believe, like my colleague, that feelings must be
stopped, controlled, or avoided, we misspend our energies. Attempts
to stamp out feelings inevitably lead to failure. No matter what
methods a person tries, feelings aren't stoppedthey continue to occur.
They aren't avoidedthey remain hidden. And because they are hidden,
beyond our awareness, they control us. This process leads some
people to a very hurtful emotional trap. Their feelings have been
hidden away for so long that, when they realize they need them and
try to access them, they can't.
I counseled a couple who were trying to cope with the discovery that
their child was severely learning disabled. They had sought
counseling because the wife, Janet, had begun avoiding all three of

her children. During one session, the husband, Roy, with desperation
showing in every feature,
 

Page 2
looked at his wife and said in the gentlest voice, ''I need to know how
you feel about this. Are you angry or what?'' We sat in silence as Janet
looked down at her hands, then at me, and finally back to Roy. Her
voice held a tone of failure as she replied, "I wish I could tell you, but
I just don't know."
Over time and with hard work, Janet discovered that she had many
feelings about her child's disability. She felt guilty, thinking it was
somehow her fault. She felt afraid that she wouldn't be able to provide
the parenting necessary to help her daughter. She felt sad when she
thought about the obstacles her daughter would have to overcome.
She felt angry that God had given her a burden that other parents
didn't have to bear.
As with so many people, anger was the most difficult emotion for her
to recognize, openly discuss, and use productively. She had many
years of misunderstanding and misinformation to overcome. The idea
that anger was bad, dangerous, and unladylike was deeply ingrained
by her parents and supported by others as she went through life. Janet
had become so adept at denying her anger that she believed what
others said about her, that she was a "nice" person who never got
angry. Then an event happened that triggered an anger so intense that
it forced her to behave in ways that were contrary to her nature.
I read about Janet in the local paper five years after she had left
counseling. She was spearheading a project to provide special
programs funded by the city for learning disabled children. I couldn't
resist calling to ask what had brought her to that point. She said,
"Lorrainne, I was afraid my daughter wouldn't get what she needed
and it pissed me off. So I got off my duff and did something about it."
Janet had reached emotional maturity. She recognized her anger,
understood that it could be used as a motivator, and took constructive
action to bring about positive change.

Whether you have difficulty with anger because you can't feel it or
because it seems to overwhelm you, the path to change begins with
one simple truth: Anger is a common, normal emotion.
For me, a simple errand at the grocery store presents myriad situations
that may result in a range of angry feelings. For instance, I feel some
level of anger when someone pulls into a parking space that I was
aiming for; the grocery cart I choose has a defective wheel; people
block the aisle with their carts, and they're nowhere in sight; I
carefully pick only nine items (foregoing my favorite snack to make
the nine) so I can use the express lane, and the woman in front of me
has twelve items and pays by check; the store uses only tiny plastic
bags that hold five items, instead of paper bags with three times that
capacity; or I return to my car, and someone has rammed a cart into it.
I could go on and on with more examples of the times I've felt some
 

Page 3
kind of anger, from mild annoyance to intense fury, while performing
tasks as simple as buying the basic necessities of life at a grocery
store. There's no need. The few examples I've offered make my point:
anger occurs every day, many times a day.
Denial of this common emotion is the result of misinformation
received as truth. This misinformation then becomes the foundation
for strongly entrenched attitudes about anger that result in its misuse.
Changing attitudes and developing new behaviors involve hard work
and effort. Entrenched and deeply hidden attitudes must be brought to
light, knowledge and understanding gained, new ways of responding
developed and practiced. At times the task seems too difficult and
tiring. As I have made mistakes and struggled with this process
myself, I have often asked if it is worth it. Then something happens,
and I have the freedom to feel and use my emotion, instead of being
used by it, and my answer becomes a resounding yesthe effort was
worth it.
The work begins with discovering the attitudes you have about anger
that may inhibit your ability to recognize and use it. That process is
the purpose of the following exercises. As you complete them, be
honest. Don't worry about getting the "right" answer. The right answer
is your answer. You will use that response later in the book to
understand where your anger has gone awry and to develop new
information, approaches, and responses to anger that are right for you.
Don't limit yourself to the space provided on these pages. A notebook
may be helpful for doing the exercises more completely and for
writing down ideas as they occur when you read the informational
chapters.
 


Page 4

Page 5

Page 6

Page 7

Page 8
What Your Answers Show about Attitudes
Now that you have completed the exercises, you have focused energy
and spent time on your experiences with angry feelings. You have
looked from many directions at your own anger and your responses to
other people's anger. Your answers are meaningful indicators of your
fundamental assumptions. You may be thinking, "I already know what
my attitudes are about anger." As you read on, however, you may be
surprised to discover a difference between what you think your
attitudes are and what your answers suggest. More often than not, our
strongest attitudes are those most deeply hidden. This defense occurs
even in highly trained counselors who claim that they believe anger to
be a positive, normal emotion. After studying their answers to the
exercises, "How Would You Describe Anger?" and "What Is the Ideal
Response?," many therapist realize that their underlying attitudes
about angry feelings are very negative.
Because these hidden attitudes show themselves in behaviors, they
exert a powerful influence over interactions with others. Therefore, it
is important to bring them to light. Only then can steps be taken to
minimize their control.
What Makes You Angry?
If you agreed with the entire list, "What Makes You Angry?," you're
in the company of many hundreds of people who helped construct the
list.
Maybe you're a person who has said, "I never get angry. It's a waste of
energy. It doesn't change anything, so why bother?" If so, what you
are saying is that there has never been anything or anyone (yourself
included) important enough to protect, defend, or fight for. I don't
think that's true. More likely, you have felt angry and didn't realize it.

If you didn't agree that prejudice, child abuse, and injustice make you
angry, and if you don't take offense when people cheat you or ignore
you, then there is a good chance that you believe anger is bad or
dangerous or hurtful. This belief is so strong and its resultant fear so
great that your anger remains hidden, even from yourself. For it is at
these times when anger is not only okay but necessary for your well-
being or the well-being of someone else.
How Would You Describe Anger?
Most, if not all, of the descriptive words from this exercise are
negative in tone. They connote a danger that is either overt or just
below the very thin
 

Page 9
layer of human control. They suggest that anger is injurious, harmful,
and painfully potent.
If you agreed with all or any of the descriptive words in the list, then
you see anger as unpleasant and hurtful. On some level, you fear
anger. Even if you added to the list some positive, descriptive
wordssuch as "energizing," "motivating," or "constructive"those
words would be minimal compared to the number of negative words.
Many people say that they don't think anger is bad, but upon closer
examination, their behavior indicates otherwise. I encountered a vivid
example of this when I was interviewed for a local newspaper. For
over an hour the reporter and I talked about the virtues of anger. She
nodded and verbally agreed with what I said throughout the interview.
I told about an angry incident from my life to illustrate a point. When
the article was written, the reporter stated, "Even Ms. Bilodeau is not
immune from anger." It was clear to me that, although the reporter
may agree on an intellectual level that anger is okay, somewhere
deeper within she believes anger is bad. "Immune" means "protected
from a disease" or ''exempt." The reporter's words gave away her
underlying attitude about anger. If anger is good, why would I want
"immunity'' from it?
When looked at together, the first two exercises, "What Makes You
Angry?" and "How Would You Describe Anger?", explain the human
conflict engendered by anger. On the one side is the reality that anger
is so common that people normally feel it many times every day. On
the other side are deeply entrenched attitudes that say angry feelings
are bad, hurtful, and dangerous. A person is continuously required to
experience a feeling he deems harmful to his well-being.
In resolving this conflict, people most often find themselves doing one
of three things:

· Never feeling anger. A highly-developed defense system does not
allow anger to emerge. It remains hidden until an experience is so
powerful that the anger bursts out.
· Feeling anger and not expressing it. When the anger asserts itself, it
is usually misdirected or excessive for the situation.
· Feeling anger and expressing it in an aggressive, hurtful way.
Each of these responses hurts the self or others and therefore
compounds the conflict by reaffirming the belief that anger is bad,
dangerous, or hurtful.
What Are Your Expectations?
This exercise shows how much power is given to anger in an
individual's life.
 

Page 10
If a youngster witnesses explosive, destructive, angry behavior at
home, then he comes to expect that everyone's anger is violent. An
angry incident means someone or something is going to be hurt.
Verbally abusive episodes encountered as a child result in the
expectation that, when anger occurs, someone will be put down and
emotionally brutalized. If anger is expressed with cold silence or
harsh glares, or pointed indifference, a child hears the powerful
message, "You're not important; I don't love you. You don't exist.
You're not worthy of a response." This silent treatment is abusive, for
it damages a person's self-esteem.
If you have experienced any of these skewed behaviors, then you have
been taught that anger is dangerous, and the bearer of angry feelings is
bad. The frequency, intensity, and duration of painful anger episodes
in your childhood determine the amount of power you bestow on
anger, the level of fear you have about it, and the harshness with
which you judge the person who is angry, yourself or another.
If your parents didn't allow you to see their expressions of anger, your
ideas about this emotion are probably confused. Their behavior was a
strong statement that angry feelings don't exist in adults. You grew up
with no model for understanding your own anger. You had no label for
it. You had no way of knowing how to express it or respond to it. If
you believed that your parents didn't feel anger, you might have
wondered what is wrong with those who do. In fact, as an adult you
may still find anger confusing.
How Did You Respond? How Do You Respond?
These two exercises help illustrate the fact that people's problems with
anger occur because they are adults coping from a child's perspective.
In other words, they try to respond to adult situations from a child's
position of vulnerability and powerlessness. Children depend upon
adults for the basic necessities of life, for food, shelter, love,

acceptance, approval, and self-identity. When these adults act out their
angry feelings in hurtful ways, children see their necessities
threatened. Survival is at stake. The danger is immediate; the fear
intense.
Did you believe the anger was your fault? Did you respond by trying
harder to do right? To be perfect? Or did you rebel and fight back?
Did you hide in order to avoid angry scenes? Did you see the world as
a place where you didn't belong? Did you evaluate yourself as bad,
stupid, or not "good enough"?
As an adult, if you look closely, you will find the same pattern. For
instance, if your response as a child was to try harder, now when your
boss expresses anger because of a mistake, you probably put forth
more effort to
 

Page 11
make sure it doesn't happen again. If the error was that of someone
else, you either help that person or act for him next time. Your
motivator is to do the job right in order to avoid anger. If you
withdrew as a child, you have probably learned to withdraw mentally
as an adult. You may still seek physical isolation when possible.
Situations from which you cannot physically escape, you know how
to escape in your mind. Even in a crowd of people, you are alone. And
if you fought back as a child, you probably do the same now. You may
even find yourself fighting other people's battles. This response might
be seen as a social attribute, except that you have learned to fight in an
aggressively destructive manner.
If you have been responding to anger in any of these ways for twenty,
thirty, or forty years, you may have discovered that they are
ineffective and costly. No matter how perfect you become, others are
still angry. The cost, your self-esteem. You are never "good enough."
The perfect housewife finds that her husband nevertheless feels angry.
No matter how aggressive you are in fighting, you lose because
people with more authority beat you. When you beat others with less
authority, acting like the boss who berates his workers, for example,
everyone sees you as the abuser, the bully. The cost, your self-esteem.
Either way, you lose. No matter how hard you try, the only way to
hide from anger is to withdraw totally from the world. The cost, your
humanity. And that's a high price to pay because we are social
creatures who need interaction with others.
What Is Your Fantasy Response?
Normally, after an angry exchange in which there is no resolution, a
person mentally relives the incident in solitude. During this process
the scene is embellished with ideas of what could have been done,
should have been done, or might be done next time.
Did your fantasy involve violence? The violence could be physical,

such as striking or maiming; it could be emotional, such as clever put-
downs, sarcasm, or telling the person off. Somehow, in your recreated
scenario, you struck back at the angry individual. If so, you may
believe anger to be a form of power, a weapon. Seeing anger as an
attack on you, you counterattack. An angry incident becomes a power
struggle. In your fantasy, you may use anger to come out on top.
Perhaps you see another person's anger as disapproval, a statement
that you are wrong. Your embellished script allows you the last word,
the winning blow. You're not wrong; the other person is. Or perhaps
you permit yourself anger only when you're in the right. Anger takes
on a right vs. wrong quality. It's a judgment.
 

Page 12
Did your fantasy involve placating the angry person? Somehow
getting him to stop being angry? Did you envision yourself storming
out of the room, slamming the door as you left? If so, you may see
anger as a device of punishment, a potentially hazardous weapon that
produces physical harm or emotional destruction. You want to stop it
before it occurs, or get out of its way to avoid harm.
In your fantasy did you put yourself down? Perhaps you thought, "I'm
wrong. I'm no good. I shouldn't have made him angry. It's my fault. I'll
never do this right." If so, you may believe that a person's anger is
controlled by external forces. You also seem to view anger as an
evaluation of self. Again, anger has become a means of disapproval,
of judgment.
What Is the Ideal Response?
People who answer this question in my workshops most commonly
propose these responses: leave the room; remove yourself until the
angry person becomes rational; stay calm and maintain control; and
let the person ventilate. Although these choices seem reasonable,
consider the implications. Feeling that you must leave an angry person
suggests an attitude that anger is dangerous. Humans run from things
they fear, things they think will be painful, hurtful, or fatal.
The idea of removing yourself until the person is rational stems from
the belief that anger either comes from or creates irrationality. Anger
equals insanity.
If you must remain calm and maintain control, what are you
controlling? Yourself? The other person? The situation? What terrible
thing happens if you don't stay calm and in control?
If you suggest allowing the angry person to ventilate, you present a
vivid picture of anger as steam in a pressure cooker. It is hot,
pressurized, and explosive. If a valve isn't turned to let some steam

escape, a catastrophe will occur.
This whole idea of ventilation stems from the theory that people
stockpile anger in a reservoir. When the reservoir gets too full, it spills
over in the form of an aggressive incident. Letting the anger out
lowers the reservoir, and avoids an aggressive episode. If you have
ever known a person who is often explosive with his anger, you can
understand the illogic of this whole theory. The reservoir should be
lowered with each explosion. If the person explodes often enough, the
reservoir should run dry, yet he keeps exploding. In fact, if you look
closely, you discover that, with time, these incidents increase.
Misinformation about anger is often presented in subtle, behavioral
 

Page 13
ways, without anyone's stopping to realize what is being taught. I was
at a friend's house when her daughter began acting out. My friend's
husband asked the girl to go upstairs and watch TV. She ignored her
father and continued to be loud and disruptive. Finally, he took her by
the shoulders, looked her directly in the eye, and in a menacing voice
said, "Daddy's getting angry." The child turned and went upstairs.
The immediate result seemed to be successfor the father.
Unfortunately for the child, anger has become a threat. Something bad
happens when someone is angry. She has also been taught that she is
responsible for other people's anger. Are these lessons true? She won't
even consider the question because, to her, they are a reality. And her
reality will be validated many times over by her father and other
adults who blame and threaten her when angry. She will continue to
believe in this reality and act accordingly throughout her life unless
something intervenes which forces her to question its validity. Even
then, she will probably find it difficult to judge false what seemed real
for so long.
You may find yourself in that position now because the lessons you
have learned about anger are pervasive and deeply entrenched. We all
are taught these lessons at a young age; we learn them experientially,
and they are continually validated throughout our lives by others who
had learned the same lessons. Consequently, you may never have
thought to question the accuracy of the information.
While doing the exercises and reading the commentary, perhaps you
discovered that you hold many of the ideas and attitudes described in
this chapter. You may be ready to argue that these attitudes are what
anger is all about, that the beliefs you've maintained for many years
are right. They have brought you this far. They may be right for you.
For the time being, don't worry about right or wrong. Instead, consider
whether you are satisfied with the way you handle angeryour own and

others'. Does your anger make you more effective as a human being?
Do you feel okay with yourself after an angry episode? If not, then
some changes are in order. And the place to start is by informing
yourself about anger so that you can view it from a different, less
frightening perspective.
 

Page 15
Chapter Two 
Taking a New Perspective on Anger
As I go through each day, tending to the daily duties and pleasures of
life, I encounter many different people doing the same. I watch them
and talk with them and feel sad. So many of these people deny the
aspect of themselves that makes them most fully humanthe ability to
have and enjoy emotions: to feel about, to feel toward, to feel for.
I have a friend who once argued that "negative" feelings couldn't be
enjoyable. I reminded her that she'd seen five showings of the movie
Love Story and cried each time. If sadness is so unenjoyable, why pay
money, not once but five times, to live through a sad experience? The
same is true of fear. Whenever a new ride, supposedly more scary than
the last, is built at the amusement park, she makes it a point to be one
of the first to ride it. If fear is so bad, why pay to be frightened?
Anyone's average day can provide the same emotions for free.
There is a difference. At the movies or amusement parks people let
themselves experience these feelings without judging them bad or
unacceptable. The misinformation about feelings that operates during
most of the day, people set aside during such activities. They stop
fighting the emotion and allow themselves to experience it for just
what it is and nothing more. The result can actually be a pleasant
sensation. The emotion itself isn't what is most unpleasant; the
judgments about it cause the greatest discomfort.
Only by moving beyond these judgments and the resultant discomfort
can a person learn to experience emotions, including anger, as they
occur. Anyone who understands what anger really is can set aside
misconceptions and realize that, like any emotion, it is functional. Not
only is anger not dangerous; it can be useful.


Page 16
Anger Is a Feeling
Most people agree that anger is a feeling, an emotion. With only a
quick glance and not much thought, this view appears to be a simple,
clear-cut idea. But what do the words "emotion" and "feeling" mean?
We must agree on a workable, practical understanding of the
vocabulary.
An emotion or feeling is an internal reaction. This reaction is a
biophysiological response, a physical sensation, created when certain
chemicals increase in the body.
1 When the body releases endorphins, for instance, a sensation of
contentment and well-being results. Humans recognize this physical
reaction as happiness or gladness.
The "re-" in reaction indicates that the chemicals and the resultant
sensation are a response to something, usually to an external event or
stimulation. Feelings may occur without an external stimulus when a
biophysiological, chemical imbalance is present. This imbalance can
be as minor as that caused by hunger, which produces an anxious
feeling, or as major as the imbalance that causes manic-depression, an
illness with vast mood swings. When the imbalance is corrected, the
feelings fade. Some people may argue that no external event has
occurred when they imagine or create an incident in their minds and
then experience emotional responses to these mental images. In this
situation, the event is similar to the images of a movie, but this
"movie" is viewed on a screen in a very private projection room. The
mind suspends reality, and the person experiences the scenes as
though they were really happening in the present. In essence, part of
the mind operates on the belief that the "show" is a real-life, external
event.

Defining an emotion as an internal reaction to an external event is
adequate only in the discussion of animals other than man. At this
level, feelings are instinctive and used most often for physical
survival. Human beings still have this primitive aspect in their array of
functioning abilities. It comes from what can be called the "old brain"
and is experienced most intensely during times of immediate danger,
when survival depends on action without thought.
Through evolution, the human mind has developed what can be
considered an additional brain. This "new brain," the neocortex,
provides the human species with the unique faculty to abstract,
symbolize, and convey information. With this development, we
gained the ability to think about, differentiate, and label various
internal reactions. Since the new brain is not an organ that operates on
instinct, we must learn these functions. With this learning, emotions
take on another dimension which must be included in the definition:
socialization.
A human being learns to name her internal reactions. This labeling
 

Page 17
involves experiencing, differentiating, and naming each
biophysiological sensation. People learn this complex behavior at a
young age. In one study, children knew how to label the four basic
emotions with the descriptive words of mad, glad, sad, and afraid, by
the age of six.
2 If such young children have learned, they must have had teachers,
the people immediately involved in children's lives.
This understanding of an emotion or feeling permits a definition of
anger:
Anger is an internal reaction, 
which an individual learns to name, 
to an external event.
The emotional process is straightforward and physically based. An
incident occurs that stimulates the brain to direct the production of the
chemical necessary for an anger response. The physical sensation
consists of increased heart and pulse rate, shallow, quick breathing,
flushed skin, increased muscle tension, increased temperature, and
possible tremors and perspiration. These biophysiological reactions
happen because an extra supply of a stimulant has been added to the
blood stream. The metabolism speeds up and the body responds
accordingly. The individual labels the complete experience "anger."
From this perspective, anger certainly doesn't seem so inauspicious. In
fact, when I saw my friend's husband look at their child and say in a
menacing voice, "Daddy's getting angry," I very much wanted to
respond, "What's the big deal? Daddy has a little extra adrenaline and
the ability to label it." But I refrained. I thought it wouldn't help the
father's attitude or the child's situation.
The important point is that anger, like any other emotion, is nothing

more than the body's internal response to the release of a natural
chemical. It removes much of the emotion's potency to realize that, in
itself, anger isn't dangerous, threatening, or hurtful.
Anger Is Not a Gigantic Mistake
Every emotion has a result directly related to the well-being of
humanity. Loneliness brings people together, forming social units, and
through numbers and cooperation, making it possible for the species
not only to survive, but to dominate the world. Guilt helps to keep
order and to restrain behavior by indicating violations of socially
dictated values. Fear signals danger. It is
 

Page 18
the body's warning that a threatening situation is at hand. It alerts a
person to readiness.
Anger is no exception, nor was it a colossal mistake, in the
development of Homo sapiens. Evolution did not take a wrong turn,
and through some bizarre quirk of nature, produce a mutation of brain
or gene which resulted in an unnatural, deviant emotion that reduced
the chances for further development and species enrichment.
In fact, anger has many functions. Modern life would be very different
and much more difficult if anger had been omitted or eliminated from
the human experience.
Survival
Of anger's many functions the most basic is survival. Without it, the
human race probably wouldn't have made it to this centuryor, if it had,
far fewer people would be alive today.
Anger is a necessary ingredient in hands-on fighting. Although that
factor may not seem important in modern civilization, it was crucial
before the technological era when physical defense against larger,
stronger animals demanded that a human fight or be killed.
Anger is the emotion that provided the incentive to struggle against
the elements and to accomplish what would have been physically
impossible without the additional strength that seems to accompany
anger. Adrenaline, the chemical involved in anger arousal, produces a
numbing effect on the body which allows a person to continue
fighting when hurt. The individual doesn't experience pain until after
the struggle, when the adrenaline level drops.
This dampening of pain serves another purpose: it makes the human
being stronger. The body's strength is far greater in anger than in
average activities. If exertion is attempted when adrenaline is not

present, pain limits what the body can do. Without pain, the body
comes closer to reaching its absolute strength potential. This power
makes the human being's success in a physical struggle more likely.
Anger also creates a tunnel-vision effect that concentrates attention
onto the opposing force. During the struggle, the individual's energies
cannot be diverted easily. Anger allows him to focus on the battle.
Both external and internal distractions are eliminated. Self-doubt and
fear of failure do not impinge on the combatant's ability to struggle. In
effect, the individual does not defeat the self.
 

Page 19
Culture
Anger functions in any culture as a social regulator. It defines social
behavior and protects societal values. Each culture determines when
an angry response is appropriate and how that response is to be
expressed. Anger is considered appropriate when the norms, mores,
and laws of the culture are violated. The intensity of the response
depends upon the importance of the violations. Thus anger defines the
boundaries of acceptable behavior for social situations. What I
considered a rather innocuous behavior, a woman's hugging Queen
Elizabeth during a visit to America, received media coverage around
the world. An English friend of mine was outraged, exclaiming, "How
dare she touch the Queen!" I thought, Why not? A good hug never
hurt anybody. To my friend's way of thinking, formed by her English
upbringing, the norms established for royalty had been violated, and
she responded with anger.
This function of anger can be seen in the list, "What Makes You
Angry?" The answersrude people, prejudice, yelling, child abuse, and
inconsiderate peopleare all culturally determined. Each society sets
the definition of rudeness, inconsideration, and child abuse. While
disciplining a child, for instance, a Native American might find it rude
and become angry if the child looked at him. An Irish American might
become angry if the child didn't look at him. Culture determines what
is deemed inconsiderate.
The "generation gap" is also a culture gap. Child abuse in America
has been defined differently from one generation to another. "Spare
the rod, spoil the child" was a guiding rule of child-rearing during my
parents' youth. Many people my age, however, become angry when
they witness parents controlling children's behavior by using any type
of physical punishment.
Perceptions of rudeness also differ in various regions because of

culture. A person from the Bronx may hear patrons in a genteel
southern restaurant mutter, "How rude," if he yells out his order. In his
natural environment, a New York deli during lunch hour, this behavior
won't be noticed; in fact, it may be the only way he can get lunch.
Anger also functions as a social bond. When a group of people
focuses anger collectively on an outside group, individual, or
situation, the shared anger ties individuals of the group together. They
have a common enemy. The lines of "we vs. they" are drawn.
3 To be a member of the "we" group, an individual must be angry at
the "they" group. This phenomenon is often observable in the
workplace, where persons of diverse personal interests come together
for eight hours a day, their common bond being the way they earn a
living.
Coworkers may build cohesiveness by developing angry feelings fo-
 

Page 20
cused on a mutual enemy. Their conversation may ridicule outsiders
with sarcasm or gossip. This enemy can be the management, another
unit, an individual not in the group, or another company. To belong in
the group, an individual must take an active role in these
conversations because it is this behavior that fuels the anger, draws
the involved people together, and strengthens the sense of ''we.'' A
person who does not participate in the angry discussions is not
considered a part of the group. In fact, when not physically present in
the group, she may even become a "they."
This bonding may undermine worker morale and, at times, may
hamper job performance or even result in sabotage, especially when
cooperation between units, management, other companies, and diverse
workers is essential to production. If performance is contingent on
competition with outsiders, the anger produced by this type of social
bonding can be used as an incentive for greater effort and harder
work. In the 1991 World Series, for example, managers put columns
from the opposing city's newspapers on bulletin boards to stir the
home team.
Another highly visible form of social bonding by anger occurs in
activist groups. Often these groups comprise people from very
different walks of life, who have little in common except angry
feelings about a particular social issue. When the social issue is
resolved, the group either disbands or focuses on another issue. Some
group members may not share the same anger about the new issue and
therefore drop out of the group. New members may join who do not
feel angry about the first issue but do about the second. It isn't the
issues, but the angry feelings about the issues that bring and hold the
individuals together as a group.
Activist groups demonstrate another cultural function of anger. Angry
feelings act as the ignition and impetus for social change. Without

anger over social injustice, America would still be under British rule
and paying taxes to England; Afro-Americans would still be enslaved;
and women would still be the property of their husbands. In each of
these situations and countless others, it was anger about a social
injustice that provided people with the motivation and necessary
courage to stand up against a strongly entrenched system and, at the
risk of their own well-being, fight for change. Without anger, these
battles would never have been started. If started, they certainly would
never have been sustained.
Communication
Anger is a vehicle of communication that always carries a message.
The person who expresses anger is trying to present information.
Often it is information that, without the anger, he wouldn't have the
courage to express. The
 

Page 21
importance placed on the message by the sender determines the
intensity of anger presented. The reverse is also true; the greater the
anger, the more valuable the communication is to the sender. If the
intended receiver doesn't indicate that the information has been heard,
the sender often emphasizes the message with stronger signals of
anger, reinforcing the importance of the communication. If you have
ever watched a child ignore a parental directive, you know exactly
what I'm talking about. When the directive is repeated, you can hear
the parent's voice become louder and the tone angrier.
Describing anger, many people use the word "violent." Psychiatrist
Albert Rothenberg contends, however, that, used as a tool of
communication, anger actually reduces episodes of violent behavior.
Instead of resorting to violence when faced with a threatening or
obstructive situation, "the angry individual can employ verbal
discharge and a whole series of specific communications to others
designed to promote removal of the threat or obstruction."
4 As the first response to a threatening or frustrating situation,
verbally communicated anger reduces the use of physical attack. If an
angry tone of voice or facial expression or command defuses the
situation, then the necessity for violence diminishes.
Motivation
When a person uses anger constructively, it acts as a motivating force
for change, for meeting personal needs, and for gaining a desired goal.
In 1982, I was sitting in my office, angry about an incident with my
supervisor. Mentally I was calling her every nasty name that I had
heard throughout my life. Finally, the question occurred to me, "Why
is she the supervisor, when I'm better at this work than she?" I looked
over at her office wall. She had a master's degree, and I didn't. As long

as I didn't, people like her would supervise me and dictate my work
life.
At that moment, I had a variety of choices. I could wallow in the
injustice of the system, making myself a victim and sloshing around in
self-pity for the rest of my career. I could become aggressive, bound
into her office, tell her everything she was doing wrong, and say that
the only reason she was the supervisor was that she had a piece of
paper. Or, I could direct my anger toward the goal of obtaining a
master's degree myself. Two days later I was enrolled in college again
and had submitted a request for a leave of absence. Anger's usefulness
didn't end there. Whenever I had to work late on an exam, a paper, or
my finals and felt myself being overtaken by drowsiness, I pictured
that woman in my mind. My adrenaline started to flow. I was good for
another hour's work.
In many situations, anger needs to be experienced and properly
 

Page 22
channeled before positive action can be taken. These circumstances
are often accompanied by the thoughts, "That's it. I've had enough. I
deserve better." Battered women present a good example of what I've
been talking about. One reason some women can't get out of a
battering relationship is that, when they are able to feel their anger,
they are unable to channel it toward a productive goal. They discover
that their ill-used anger only leads to more battering. For survival,
they hide their angry feelings until the day comes when they cross an
invisible line and no longer can feel their anger or anything else.
Others, hearing a battered woman's story, think she must be irate, yet
she seems to feel nothing. With badly bruised self-esteem and a
history of suffering anger's violent potential, battered women have
learned to flee this emotion. Without help, they cannot experience the
anger that they need to summon the courage and energy required to
make drastic changes.
For anger to be useful, people must do more than merely experience
the feeling. Those whom anger motivates productively undergo a
four-step process. First, they feel the anger. Second, they recognize
the situation that provoked it. Then they identify a healthy, productive
goal that would alleviate the situation. And finally, they maintain the
anger until they can take the first steps toward the goal.
Psychological Protection
Mrs. Jones grew up in a family with seven brothers and sisters. Her
father left the family when she was eight. Her mother did odd jobs,
which were sometimes demeaning, in order to provide the basic
necessities for her family without help from the Welfare Department.
Mrs. Jones strongly holds to the belief that welfare is for those who
need it.
Mrs. Jones and her husband, both aged fifty-eight, have been together
now for thirty-eight years. They have worked hard, providing for two

children and gathering some amenities of the middle-class life.
Although her husband was unfortunately unable to work during the
winter owing to ill health, Mrs. Jones continued with her job. But
clerical work didn't pay enough to cover all their bills. They applied
for and received fuel assistance from the New England city where
they lived.
One morning, Mrs. Jones read in the local paper that the mayor, in an
attempt to reduce the budget by lowering the fuel-assistance
allotment, had said, "Only those who are too lazy to work ask for fuel
assistance." Mrs. Jones was irate. The mayor's comment hit at the core
of her values. She had always taken pride in being a hard worker. It
was a piece of her self-image that she was willing to defend, and
defend it she did. She wrote a pointed letter to the mayor, who invited
her for a meeting. Once in his office, she re-
 

Page 23
fused to move until he retracted his statement publicly. The next
morning the paper ran the mayor's apology.
Mrs. Jones's response demonstrates what is perhaps anger's most
important function for modem people: the protection of personal
dignity, identity, and self-esteem. When a person thinks she is being
put down, ignored, ridiculed, or victimized, anger is likely to occur.
This feeling encourages the individual to stand up for self and defend
against being cheated, belittled, or emotionally attacked. It is the piece
of self that says, "You don't have the right to treat me that way."
Not only is anger not dangerous, it is useful. The human body needs
this mechanism. A person needs the ability to protect herself from
physical and verbal attacks. When her solitary power is inadequate for
this protection, she needs to bond with others to gain the necessary
additional strength. No emotion or human characteristic other than
anger performs these functions. This fact being true, how has anger
earned a reputation as the trigger for harm and destruction? Like an
ax, anger is not inherently destructive. It has many possible functions.
But if a person doesn't learn the many aspects of proper use, the
results can be disastrous. To avoid the possible harmful effects, anger
must be understood. What are the triggers for healthy anger? What
does productive anger look like? How can it be used constructively?
 

Page 25
Chapter Three 
Acknowledging the Complexities of Anger
Human beings are the only creatures on earth that can think about,
process, and understand their feelings. Only they contemplate and
judge their emotions and resultant behaviors. Cats can't; horses can't;
chimps can't. Even my dog, the companion I think is so intelligent,
can't. She doesn't think about why her hair stands on end when she
barks viciously at the little schnauzer next door. And she certainly
doesn't return home, sit in her favorite chair, and think, "Jeez, I'm a
real bully, picking on a dog half my size." She feels and acts solely
out of instinct. She can't abstract or think about her feelings. But
human beings can and do.
As a person goes through each day, his mind is constantly working:
gathering new information, adding it to the old, rearranging this data,
and drawing conclusions. The results can be acted upon immediately
or set aside and possibly used at a future time. Ironically, this process
that sets people apart and above other animals also impedes the
productive use of emotions, especially anger. If the human brain were
as simple as an animal's, emotions would be clear and action
automatic. Because of its complexity, many pieces must all operate
properly together for anger to work constructively.
An Emotion Is Only One Element of a Process
Some noted researchers argue that anger and aggressive behaviors are
instinctive and biologically based. Other observers, just as
noteworthy, adamantly contend that aggression is not instinctive, but a
problem-solving technique learned from imitation of role-models.
1 Both groups back up their


Page 26
views with valid studies. How can both findings be true when there is
such an apparent conflict?
What reconciles the disparity is the fact that people today are a
product of evolution; the instinctive component of aggression, studied
by some researchers, lies in the primitive area of the brain. That
component comes into play when a person's physical well-being or
that of another is at stake. The response from the "old brain" involves
only a minor amount of mental activity except recognition of a present
danger and automatic mobilization of the body's survival mechanism.
The process is similar to my dog's experience in an emergency:
recognition of danger, intense fear, the need to fight (anger), and the
fight itself (aggression).
The other group of researchers studied the anger and aggression that
originates in the "new brain" or neocortex functions. Since this part of
the brain analyzes, learns, and abstracts, it operates on thought, not
instinct. These researchers therefore concluded that anger and
aggression are a cognitive, imitative process.
Instinct cannot and need not change. It is not people's instinctive
aggression that causes problems. In today's society, a minority of
individuals encounter situations in which their physical survival is at
stake, when the primitive brain activates. Most confusion about anger
and what people do with it concerns the anger generated by the
neocortex, the topic of this book.
Any discussion of anger begins with an investigation of emotions in
general and their resultant behaviors. Earlier, an emotion was defined
as an internal reaction, which an individual learns to name, to an
external event. This description states what a feeling is, not how it
arose or how it is expressed. The feeling itself is neither the beginning
event nor the end result. It is one element, the emotional piece, of a
complex process, which also includes mental and behavioral

components. Figure A depicts how the components work together in
this process.
Figure A
 

Page 27
This diagram suggests the circular character of an emotion's
incitement, its presence as an experience, and its expression. What the
drawing omits is the enormous input and learning from many sources
which are necessary for the process.
Event
Something happens that signals the brain. This event may seem as
insignificant as the smell of fresh coffee or a grumbled "Good
morning" from a coworker. Even a memory of a previous situation,
something that happened earlier in the day, or yesterday, or years ago,
may set off the process.
Thought
Once the event is sensed, the brain interprets the event. The person's
current perception is influenced by past experiences, the lessons he
learned from those situations, and his understanding of the present
social setting. Often an individual must possess both an array of
experiences and knowledge of social norms to interpret an event
accurately.
If the event is a memory, this assessment has already been made, but
the mental revival of the situation may develop new insight and
change the earlier interpretation. Whether the event originates
internally or externally, from all of this mental activity, a predominant
thought emerges.
Chemical
The brain responds to this thought by signaling the body to produce a
chemical.
Emotion
The released chemical creates a physiological sensation, which the

individual recognizes as a particular feeling.
Behavior
The person then chooses a behavior. This choice isn't simple. It
coordinates all the information gathered during the interpretation
process with the signal sent by the physiological sensation. The
emotion is labeled. Then the brain quickly scans the array of
behaviors available and the person acts.
Many factors determine what behavioral choices a person has de-
 

Page 28
veloped. No two people have the same range of options. Children
learn behaviors by watching and imitating significant people. The
acquisition of knowledge and experience modifies those behaviors,
modifications which are especially important when one judges the
socially acceptable response to a situation.
Reaction
The behavior a person chooses affects the other people who are
present, who react in turn.
If no one is present when the behavior occurs, or if the event is
internal, the reaction happens in the person's own mind. She judges
and responds to her own behavior. I once received a phone call from a
potential client whose opening line was, "I understand you know
something about anger." As we talked and she explained her reasons
for calling, I found out that she had just felt enraged over an incident
with a friend. Being alone, she looked around for something to throw.
When she couldn't find anything substantial, she slammed the door of
the wood stove with such force that its glass window broke. I asked
what she was telling herself about that behavior. In other words, what
was her reaction to herself. She said, "I destroy everything. I hate it. I
want to run away."
Event
The reaction constitutes another event, and the circle continues.
Although this process appears very complicated, it plays out in
everyday situations so fluidly and instantaneously that we hardly
notice: you step out onto your front porch on the first spring-like day
of the year. A soft breeze brushes your face. You take a deep breath
and smell the fresh odor of moist earth (Event). Your mind responds,
"Pretty day" (Thought). A chemical is released that produces a nice
sensation throughout your body. You feel glad (Emotion). Going to

your car, you smile and nod hello to the mail carrier (Behavior). He
smiles and nods back (Reaction/Event). "He's a nice guy," you think
(Thought). This positive outlook and resultant feeling persists as you
drive to work. Even the minor traffic jams don't bother you. You turn
the car radio to your favorite music and reinforce the experience.
When you arrive at work, your spouse calls to tell you that your
brother has been in a car accident (Event).
Your mind springs to a picture of a badly wrecked automobile, and
you think, "John's in that wreckage" (Thought). Adrenaline begins to
flow. Your body temperature starts to rise, and you feel shaky. Your
hands are wet.
 

Page 29
You're afraid (Emotion). In a voice a little higher pitched than normal,
you ask, "Is John all right?" (Behavior).
Your spouse says, "Oh, yes. Somehow he ended up with only a few
cuts and bruises" (Reaction/Event).
You think, "He's okay" (Thought). The chemicals change and you feel
relief (Emotion). Exhaling a deep sigh, you say, "Thank God!"
(Behavior).
This circular process continues for the rest of the day, every minute of
the day, until you sleep.
How Anger Fits into the Process
Once the circular process of a feeling is understood, the next logical
step is to place anger into the process and treat it like any other
emotion. For years, that's what I did. In my training, I had learned that
the behavior most constructive for mental and emotional health is the
free expression of intense emotions. Such expression, I had learned,
permits relief from hurtful emotions and enables the development of
deeper, more meaningful interpersonal relationships. During my years
as a counselor, I found that this assumption is true about the feelings
of fear, loneliness, sadness, and guilt. But when anger is involved, I
noticed the opposite result. People back away from the person who
expresses anger. Relationships don't become deeper or closer. On the
contrary, the involved people separate further.
Despite this realization, I had two reasons for continuing to encourage
people to express anger freely. Anger is a feeling, and I believe that
the sharing of feelings leads to more substantial relationships. I also
had bought into the "reservoir theory": a person doesn't let anger out,
but carries it around, adding new supplies each time anger occurs and
remains unexpressed; eventually it overflows in the form of an

aggressive, violent explosion. Ventilation lowers the level of the
reservoir and averts violence.
In 1980, when I was asked to train professionals to help angry clients,
I researched the subject. I wanted to back up my theories with other
professionals' techniques and the results from studies.
As I read over a hundred articles, research studies, and books, I found
that many counseling professionals held beliefs similar to my own and
were acting accordingly. But the research didn't always support our
practices. Below is a synopsis of information I gathered from studies.
It helps explain the ingredients and process necessary for an
individual to use anger as a positive, functional aspect of the
personality.
·
Ventilation correlates significantly with greater physical aggression.
2
 

Page 30
·
Catharsis does not reduce the physiological arousal of anger.
3
· The physiological arousal of anger is reduced by physical motor
activity.4
· Verbally discharged anger is used to remove threats and
obstructions.5
· Anger protects integrity and self-identity. Put-downs are the most
frequent incitement of angry feelings.6
· Anger is always accompanied by anxiety. Anger acts as a defense
against that anxiety.7
· High self-disclosure, followed by personal threat, is a powerful
elicitor of anger.8
· Assertiveness training reduces aggression.9
· Fear and anger are mechanisms that protect, one by escape and the
other with the desire to attack.10
· Anger is created by both environmental and imagined cues. The
person evaluates these cues, forms a value judgment, and makes an
accusation.11
This summary of information concerning the productive use of anger
suggests the complexity of the emotion. In some ways, it performs
differently from other emotions. Its constructive use requires more
than the circular formula of feeling it and letting it out, feeling it again
and letting it out again. A person would be trapped in this cycle
forever; according to the studies on ventilation and catharsis, the
anger and resultant behavior become more intense with each turn

through the cycle. The reservoir of anger, if it exists, becomes larger,
not smaller. Other people move further and further away.
Emotion
Figure B, a linear adaptation of the circle diagram, depicts the process
of constructive anger. It occurs after the body experiences the
adrenaline-produced sensation of fear, which could be recognized as
nervousness, anxiety, or insecurity. When the individual can't avoid
the fear-invoking situation, or if angry feelings would produce a gain
for the individual, the emotion changes to anger. It functions to protect
against whatever object, situation, or person is creating the fear.
Anyone who has been cut off by a careless driver and has responded
with anger knows how quickly this phenomenon can occur.
A dotted line crosses the feeling area of the diagram between anger
and fear. Since anger is an emotion, it belongs in this area. But it is
never a primary emotion. It is always secondary to fear or anxiety.
This fact explains why anger differs from other feelings. Its main
function is to protect and build
 

Page 31
walls. It masks another emotion, it defends, and therefore, its
performance more closely matches that of a defense mechanism than
that of a feeling. For this reason, shared anger doesn't bring
antagonists closer together, catharsis doesn't reduce anger arousal, and
ventilation doesn't diminish the intensity of angry feelings.
In fact, the opposite occurs. Any defense used, whether it be
rationalization, projection, or outright denial, hides feelings and keeps
other people at an emotional distance. If a person were to wallow
around in that defense or have it validated through the ventilation
process, it would become more prevalent in her character and more
strongly entrenched. The results would be greater inability to
experience the hidden feelings and increased emotional distance in
relationships with others.
I have observed another characteristic of defenses which I have not
seen investigated in the research. When a defense is used to its utmost
effect, and then stretched further, if another defense doesn't take over
immediately, the feelings underneath pour forth. A friend at her
mother's funeral was laughing and joking to hide her sadness. After
about half an hour, she suddenly stopped in the middle of a laugh and
began sobbing. Her defense of laughter had been stretched beyond its
limit.
All of the reactions described above apply as well to anger, including
the last. Many times I have watched a person's anger heighten rapidly
until it reached its limit, broke away, and left the person shaking and
crying as the fear, which lay beneath, surfaced.
The fact that anger acts as a defense mechanism doesn't mean it is not
an emotion. It involves a physiological response, which can be
labeled, to an external event. It prepares the body to ward off an
attack. That is the function of this emotion. To try to make anger fit
the mold and react like other feelings denies its very character.

So far, anger of the neocortex seems similar to that of the old brain.
Born of fear, it functions to protect and defend. It differs from the
instinctive response in what it protects and how it defends.
Thought
The neocortex abstracts and produces symbols. That ability enables
human beings to form a concept of self and to determine how that self
fits into the immediate environment and, at times, the rest of the
world. This idea of self, whether it be called self-concept, self-image,
or self-identity, begins developing shortly after birth and is composed
of positive and negative evaluations provided by a child's significant
people. Very early in life, a child internalizes these judgments from
others as if he had made them himself. After a harsh
 

Page 32
reprimand, a child thinks, ''I'm bad,'' instead of the more realistic
thought, "Mother said I'm bad." After praise, the child thinks, "I'm
good," not the more accurate description, "The teacher likes the way I
read." In this process, a conception of the self develops. This image
remains into adulthood. Being the basis for personal evaluation, it
colors interpretations of external events.
When a person has many more positive self-evaluations than negative
ones, an affirming self-concept evolves. He sees self as a good person,
on equal footing with other people, worthwhile as a human being,
deserving of personal rights. The concept of self as a valued piece of
humanity is affirmed. It is neither an inflated nor deflated evaluation
of self. It isn't about being better or worse than others. It affirms the
idea, "As a person, I am equal. I belong. I am not above others in a
godlike posture, nor am I below others, filling a subhuman role."
An affirming self-concept furnishes a sense of adequacy, a general,
overall feeling of being equipped to handle the events each day may
bring. It provides self-esteem. It engenders the soft dignity that allows
the person to make mistakes without the shame of self-deprecation.
Anger's role is to protect this sense of adequacy from situations and
events that are perceived as threats to the affirming self-concept. And
because an individual with this realistic perspective of self has a
realistic view of the events in her life, these threats are accurately
perceived and the resultant anger is appropriate to the situation.
 

Page 33
Figure B


Page 34
Behavior
The lower part of the model depicting behavior shows that, once anger
is aroused, it defends most effectively when the individual employs an
assertive response. This type of response neither attacks nor retreats,
but holds firm. It states fact and feeling. It allows the anger to be
heard in the person's tone of voice and seen in the person's facial
expression. It describes the situation as perceived and indicates what
the person needs for that situation to change. It then requires that the
person follow through to obtain those needs. If those needs aren't met
initially, the individual uses the anger to develop another plan to assert
self. No matter how many attempts are required, the person with an
affirming self-concept persists until she preserves her sense of human
adequacy.
With constructive anger, people do not choose behaviors with the
purpose of resolving the anger. Problems need resolution. Anger,
functioning normally, is not a problem. It is a tool that protects a
person's self-image. Once the affirming self-concept and the sense of
adequacy are free from threat, the anger, no longer necessary,
dissipates.
Taken as a whole, the linear model of healthy anger shows the many
components of a complex process. A person with self-esteem, seeing
that his sense of adequacy is threatened, initially feels fear and
anxiety. Because there is no need or means to avoid the situation, or
because standing firm in the situation is more advantageous, this
feeling changes to anger. The individual then chooses and acts out a
behavior that protects his self-concept but won't harm others or self.
I remember the day my friend Bob, an accountant, came to my house,
shaking with anger. In fact, his fury was so intense that it took a while
for him to get his story out. His superior earlier that afternoon had
belittled him for an omission in one of his accounts. Bob had made the

mistake because that same supervisor had failed to give him valuable
information.
Bob went on to tell me that a similar situation had occurred ten days
before. At that time, he had defended himself by expressing his
displeasure about the criticism, especially for something not his fault.
He had said that he didn't want such a thing to happen again, but now
it had. Bob sputtered with anger, "It didn't work. What do I do now? I
can't just leave. I have bills to pay."
Although my friend had some understanding of assertiveness, he had
missed two important points. People don't change just because we ask;
in fact, people don't change even when we demand. Moreover, an
assertive response is often more than an event. Instead, it is a program
of actions in which one behavior lays the foundation for the next, and
that one for the next, and so on. The person becomes assertive by
taking that first step and remains so
 

Page 35
throughout the process.
By the end of the evening, Bob and I had rewritten his resume. The
next day he mailed out copies to twenty firms in the area. Within six
weeks, he had a new job and a new supervisor who didn't unfairly
criticize him.
These results confirmed his self-concept, his knowledge that he is a
person deserving respect.
An individual who is having problems with anger can change her
process and learn to use anger constructively. Before she can achieve
this goal, however, she needs to know the cause of the problems. Is it
the building of a reservoir that eventually and continually overflows? I
wish it were that simple. It would make the remedy easy: reduce the
amount by letting the anger out. But anger by definition is the
physiological sensation created by the production of adrenaline in the
body. To state that an individual has a large supply of anger (a
reservoir) is the same as saying she carries around an extra supply of
adrenaline twenty-four hours a day. That is impossible.
Another invalidation of the reservoir idea is the fact that angry
feelings can easily be reduced by physical activity, which reduces the
adrenaline. Nevertheless, because the emotion is only one piece of the
process, the anger will certainly return.
If the reservoir theory isn't the answer, what is? What blocks a person
from gaining access to and using the anger experience in a way that
not only doesn't harm self or others, but affirms self and respects
others?
 

Page 37
Chapter Four 
Understanding How Anger Goes Awry
Jack seems to walk around with a chip on his shoulder, at the ready to
contradict and argue. Darlene is always smiling, even on days
following her husband's drunken episodes, when he has repeatedly
degraded her. Carla is shy and retiring, spending most of her time
doing for others, and then complaining constantly to her sister about
how people use her. Jason loses his temper at the drop of a hat. These
people are unable to use angry feelings to enrich their lives. Instead,
the anger has turned against them and become a vehicle of pain. To
discover how this distortion of nature happens, one must understand
the many ways people can lose their ability to use any emotion for its
intended function. Then, by combining this information with research
findings and applying the results to anger specifically, it is possible to
see how the anger process goes awry.
How Emotions Become Distorted
Understanding the circular process of emotions and describing it on
paper may make it seem easy. Obviously it isn't. Many people have
difficulty experiencing and expressing their emotions. The fact is that
problems may impair any element of the process and, because it is
circular, disrupt it throughout.
Thought
My description of the emotional process crucially assumes that the
interpretation of the event coincides with realitynot the subjective
reality of the in-
 


Page 38
dividual, but objective reality. When perceptions are skewed, when a
person's defense mechanisms distort and limit his ability to interpret
life events accurately, the range of emotional experiences diminishes,
behavioral options are fewer, and reactions from others have a greater
tendency to be negative. The person applies another distorted
interpretation to these reactions, and the process continues, becoming
progressively deformed.
Because the interpretation of an event develops from personal
experience, misinterpretations are common. I once asked a worker
whom I supervised to come into my office. She looked panic-stricken.
I asked what was going on, and she replied, "I didn't do anything
wrong." I told her that, on the contrary, I wanted to offer her a
promotion. She appeared shocked. As we talked, she explained that, in
the past, being called into the supervisor's office meant a reprimand.
Chemical
Anything that disrupts the body's chemical balance directly affects a
person's emotional state because it determines physiological
sensation. In fact, serious chemical disruptions create major illnesses
such as depression and schizophrenia. The reverse is also true: PMS
and such diseases as diabetes cause major chemical imbalances. These
illnesses produce extreme emotions and require medical treatment.
Some of the other influences on a person's chemical make-up include
diet, stress, resting habits, and exercise. An individual who begins to
experience intense feelings that seem unrelated to real situations or
events may find the cause in such factors.
Prescription and nonprescription drugs also interrupt the natural
production and release of body chemicals. When my friend Richard
began taking prescribed steroids for a medical condition, he
experienced mood swings that ranged from deep sadness to

overwhelming anger. He cried uncontrollably one minute and broke
things the next. He thought he was going crazy. His doctor sent him to
a psychiatrist, who explained that steroids cause emotional instability
in some people.
Because of the nature and seriousness of Richard's illness, the steroids
unfortunately could not be stopped or exchanged for another
medication. But much of his anxiety was reduced when he understood
what was happening. Anyone taking prescription drugs who finds that
mood swings are suddenly a problem should contact the prescribing
physician. Another drug may be available that doesn't have this side
effect; or the dosage of the medication may need to be modified.
Over-the-counter medications may also affect mood. Any substance
 

Page 39
that contains caffeine or causes drowsiness as a side effect is
especially likely to produce emotional changes.
Alcohol and illegal drugs interfere with the chemical balance of the
body. Indeed, the sole purpose of using them is to change moods.
Regular use of these substances may result in episodes of depression,
hostility, or anxiety. Excessive use produces these same emotional
states with greater frequency and more intensity. Such a case
necessitates an evaluation and counsel by a professional who
specializes in substance abuse.
Emotion
In most cultures, taboos forbid certain feelings and their expression.
The culture determines which emotions are acceptable. For instance,
some boys are taught that men aren't supposed to cry. Many times I've
heard a parent say to a son, "Now be a man, don't cry." To suppress an
emotion, especially if he feels it intensely, requires the child to hide it
from himself. The child develops a mental defense system that tells
him he doesn't feel sad. The strength of this system determines how
much sadness he can feel. The sadness is there, but his thinking won't
allow him to experience the physiological sensation.
Other taboos restrict the social acceptability of openly experiencing an
emotion. A feeling may be all right to have at a party, but not at work.
If it occurs at work, it must be concealed. Masked too often, the
feeling becomes hidden, even from the person carrying it.
Some adults who grew up in a family that prohibited most emotions
and their expression are unable to label feelings. In childhood, such a
person rarely saw significant adults express certain feelings. When
forbidden feelings did arise, they were assigned the name of a more
"acceptable" feeling. As an adult, this individual continues to attach
incorrect labels to these feelings, a habit that results in isolation and

obstruction of intimacy. Other people, viewing the mislabeled feelings
as inappropriate to the situation, back away, not only emotionally, but
physically as well.
Behavior
Most behavioral patterns develop during childhood and then are
modified by experiences throughout adolescence and adulthood. A
child observes significant adults. She imitates their interactions and
incorporates into her own range of possible behaviors the adults' ways
of resolving conflicts and problems. If these behaviors are ineffective,
then the child responds ineffectively throughout her life, unless she
somehow expands her repertoire. She may wonder why things don't
work out, or why other people get all the breaks.
 

Page 40
The number of behaviors, effective or ineffective, accessible to an
individual are very limited if significant adults have displayed only a
few options. As the child grows older and begins interacting with
others outside the family setting, she lacks the behaviors necessary to
cope with a multitude of varying situations.
This same problem of limited behavioral choices also occurs when
adults, out of love and the need to protect, try to insulate children
from painful but normal life events. A child who isn't allowed to
attend funerals, for instance, will not know how to act at a funeral
when he grows up.
Another limiting behavioral condition exists when a person was raised
in a family that provided an array of behavioral choices, but he has
lacked the opportunities to expand and modify these choices through
life experiences. This modification process involves skills developed
by practice. It involves recognizing nuances in a present situation, and
rearranging an old behavior to fit the new necessity. If a person lacks
diversity in life experience, he may not even be aware that
circumstances require new or modified behaviors. This obliviousness
often happens when a person steps from one culture to another, or
from one social class to another. At a social gathering, he employs
familiar behaviors that were acceptable in past circumstances but now
violate the new group's norms. At a formal dinner for contributors to
our scholarship fund, I saw a guest cringe as he watched my coworker
use bread to sop up the gravy on his plate, a behavior acceptable in
another setting.
Reaction
The reaction behavior of others from the external environment affects
one's internal emotional circle. When a person spends most of her
time with others who are kind, honest, and positive, the feedback is of
this nature, and her internal response follows suit. The child who is

told repeatedly that she is pretty begins to believe it. The worker who
is acknowledged for merit, sees self as worthy.
On the other hand, if the people surrounding her are sarcastic,
manipulative, and judgmental, the events in the environment become
a negative barrage, producing an abundance of hurtful feelings. To
survive emotionally, the individual must use defenses often. The more
often defenses are used, the harder they are to turn off. They carry
over into other situations where they are not needed, distorting the
interpretation of events. A person who spends a great deal of time
with a sarcastic group of people expects to hear sarcasm, not only
from them, but also from others. Because of her expectation, she hears
sarcasm when people don't intend it. She even hears silent sarcasm
from herself. This misunderstanding results in distortions in thought.
 

Page 41
Research about Destructive Anger
Nancy, a counselor at a treatment center, attended a Weekend Anger
Clinic that I facilitated. When asked what prompted her to show up at
a twenty-hour group about anger, she explained that her friends
continually told her that she looked angry and defensive.
She went on to say, "Even when I'm working with clients and I think
I'm showing them that I care, they say I'm loud and harsh. I don't feel
angry then. When I am angry, I pout."
Nancy's anger was destructive. It was hurting those she tried to help,
affecting her competency as a counselor, and damaging her social
relationships. How had the variables that distort emotions affected the
anger process in such a way that her anger had become so hurtful?
To answer this question, we need to go to the research findings, which
provide some clues on the development of anger, not as a tool for
protection but as a pain-producing weapon. Below is a synopsis of
these findings:
·
Aggression is a response to frustration.
1
· Aggression is a learned problem-solving technique.2
· There is a strong cultural factor in aggression.3
· Aggression is most likely to occur when the chance of painful
consequences is low.4
· Violence is a way of overcoming a strong sense of worthlessness and
helplessness.5

· Anger is tied to self-identity.6
· People remember experiences of threat, anxiety, and anger.7
· Both depression and anger are strongly influenced by the irrational
belief that external events create happiness and problems.8
· Both angry and depressed people blame their situation and feelings
on others.9
· People with a diagnosis of depression have explosive episodes of
aggression.10
· Fear, anger, and depression are somehow linked.11
· There is a difference between anger and hostility, and between anger
and violence. Anger is equated with these other manifestations
because they often occur together.12
One finding deserves special attention and discussion. A 1986 self-
reporting
 

Page 42
survey of prisoners convicted of violent crimes shows that 53.5
percent admitted to being under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or a
combination when they committed the acts for which they were
imprisoned.
13 This statistic is probably low. Since it is a self-reporting survey, it
requires that the respondents answer honestly, and some may be
unwilling to admit to alcohol and drug use.
Even if this statistic is accurate, 53.5 percent is a strong indication that
alcohol and other drugs are variables in violent behavior. At the very
least, they are potentiating ingredients of extreme aggression that
cannot be ignored. Nothing can change a person's anger patterns when
alcohol or other drugs are involved until the chemical use stops. These
chemicals cloud the thought process. They distort reality and impair
judgment. They radically interfere with the body's chemical make-up.
If you are reading this because you or someone you care about is
having difficulty with anger, consider whether alcohol or other drugs
are involved. If the answer is yes, please put this manual aside and go
to a substance-abuse professional. Further reading can bring about no
benefit until the chemical use stops.
How Anger Becomes Destructive
The research findings and the variety of ways feelings can be affected
suggest that the distortion of healthy anger is a complex and gradual
process. (Figure C demonstrates this fact.)
People don't live in isolation. The importance and magnitude of
culture and its effects upon an individual's inner life cannot be
overestimated. People learn and transmit cultural norms through small
social groups (family, church, school, peers, and others) that adapt the

larger society's patterns, customs, and beliefs to their specific needs.
This cultural training begins before a child can speak and is so
pervasive that people pay as little attention to it as they do to the air
they breathe. Yet nothing has a greater impact on the individual's
experience and use of anger than this one variable; from these
miniature societies, an individual learns about emotions, self, and
acceptable behaviors.
When I talked with Nancy, the counselor who was not aware of her
own anger, I asked what her parents had done when they became
angry at her for doing something wrong. This information suggested
the attitudes she had learned about anger. She talked mostly about her
mother, who would ignore her, sometimes for as long as a week. How
this one behavior affected Nancy's ability to feel and express angry
feelings will be pointed out as I discuss how the components of anger
go awry.
 

Page 43
Emotion
Our culture promulgates many false tenets about fear and anger. When
integrated into a person's response pattern, these beliefs create
problems. Probably as many misconceptions about fear and anger
exist as there are human beings. One of the most common is the idea
that anger is an accusation and is equivalent to disapproval of the
human person. Someone with this perspective has to see self as right,
and the target of the anger arousal as wrong, for this emotion to be
acceptable. At an extreme, he must set about methodically proving the
other's wrongness. His anger is therefore very judgmental, leaving
little room for mistakes from self or others. The flip side is also true:
he interprets other people's anger as finger-pointing and accusatory, an
evaluation of his personal worth.
To a greater or lesser degree, most parents teach this misconception
about anger without realizing the lesson they are instilling. When do
parents express anger toward a child? The answer is obvious: when
the child has made a mistake, done wrong, or failed to follow
directions. There is nothing inappropriate about a parent's expressing
anger as long as the child is not accused of having caused the emotion
and as long as the message is clear that the behavior is wrong, not the
child.
When her mother was angry, Nancy was treated as a nonperson. She
learned that she had caused her mother's anger and that anger is
hurtful.
Another false view society teaches is the idea that anger is bad and
the person who feels it is a bad person. Adults teach this lesson very
easily with phrases like ''Don't be angry,'' or with words spoken in a
derogatory tone of voice: "Oh, him. He's an angry person." The
message is clear: something is wrong with this emotion and with the
person who has it.

Since moving from New England to the South eighteen years ago, I
have encountered the mistaken belief, taught by some churches'
doctrine, that anger is a sin. When I inquired about the theory behind
this belief, people explained that anger is the opposite of love and that
it interferes with a person's ability to love. Therefore, anger is a sin
because it blocks the love that God wants us to feel.
I do not have the expertise to argue about what God wants. I can argue
that anger and love are not opposites and that anger does not interfere
with love. Indeed, anger is an integral part of love. There is no need to
look far to understand what I mean. The relationship between a
mother and her child illustrates the point. Think of how strong and
unconditional that love is, and yet, each mother I have talked to agrees
that her angriest moments involve her children.
Many people have learned that anger is dangerous. A child who has
watched an angry father batter his mother, who has received physical
pun-
 

Page 44
Figure C


Page 45
ishment as discipline, or who has incurred harsh emotional abuse from
angry parents, has learned that, when someone is angry, someone else
gets hurt. Anger is then seen as a weapon of revenge, pain, and
punishment. It is harmful. It is a danger to be avoided. It is violent.
Nancy's mother taught her this lesson. Ignoring a child, for a short
time, let alone a long time, is emotional abuse. Nurturance is as vital
to a child's emotional well-being as food is to her physical health.
Our culture inculcates other erroneous views about emotions that
affect the anger process, such as fear is wrong. This piece of
misinformation is usually held by a person who believes that feelings
are divided into two categories: good and bad. Good feelings are those
deemed pleasant. Bad feelings are all the rest. These groups are
mutually exclusive, and only feelings from the pleasant category are
acceptable. The others aren't allowed. Fear is almost always placed in
the "bad" category.
Parents, teachers, and friends imply this falsehood every time they try
to remove fear from someone by saying, "There's nothing to be afraid
ofit won't hurt," or, "Don't be nervous; it'll be okay." The idea comes
across that to be nervous or scared is not okay.
The idea that men don't feel afraid distorts countless personalities in
our culture. Feshback's study not only showed that children learn to
label feelings by the age of six, but that a significant number of boys
could not label fear.
14 I am convinced that, at an early age, boys learn that fear is not a
manly emotion. Cowards and sissies are afraid; men are not. This
attitude used to be called the "John Wayne Syndrome," a term that can
now be updated to the "Rambo Syndrome."
"Be a big boy; face it like a man," are the words spoken to many a

small child. They mean, "hide your fear; don't feel it." Probably the
fathers of such children rarely, if ever, demonstrate their fear, a
flatness which reinforces the lesson.
A concomitant of the damaging emotional rule about men and fear is
the prohibition that ladies don't get angry. There is something socially
unacceptable about a woman who openly expresses anger.15 Even if
she expresses her angry feelings appropriately, she is often labeled as
aggressive, unfeminine, or tyrannical.
This particualar lesson is dear to me, since my mother verbalized it
and demonstrated it. Despite what I know about anger, it is a hard
lesson to overcome. Every time I feel angry, a twinge of inadequacy
shoots through me. I am sure that, at that moment, I just flunked
"ladyhood."
Many people recognize their angry feelings but then attempt to
distance themselves from those feelings by means of the
misconception that another person is responsible. Something or
someone else has caused the anger
 

Page 46
sensation. This untruth is so strong that it becomes a two-way
channel: you're responsible for my angry feelings, and I'm responsible
for yours. My anger is your fault and your anger is my fault. For my
physiological sensation of adrenaline to be reduced, you must change.
And for yours to diminish I must change.
Blaming anger on another person is so common that it has become
incorporated into our language: "You make me angry." Even
professionals who teach communication skills help to keep this
misinformation going as they train their students to say, "I feel angry
because/when you do that." The word "because'' places direct blame
for the anger on the other person. The word "when" implies another
clear message: ''When you stop, my anger will go away. The
responsibility for its starting and stopping is yours." Though Nancy's
mother never said a word about her angry feelings, the message was
clear. Nancy was to blame.
The assimilation of such misinformation as these cultural tenets into a
person's feeling life results in distortions, a limited range of emotions,
or a lack of feeling. Belief in these ideas requires the individual to
deny and avoid the feelings. The consequence is an inability to feel,
reverse labeling and unclear labeling, and adoption of the victim
posture.
The inability to feel develops when a person believes that angry
feelings are so bad that they must be avoided at any cost. To some
extent Nancy experienced this problem. Her friends could see her
anger, even when she didn't know she was feeling it.
Since anger is an intense physiological sensation, a strong defense
system of denial must be developed to keep it hidden. This system is
so firmly entrenched and deeply rooted that feelings less intense than
anger are also masked, not only from others but also from self. The
person who cannot feel angry also loses the ability to experience the

physiological sensations responsible for fear, guilt, and joy. Nancy
couldn't show feelings of care to her clients.
In this state, the emotional tools needed for effective livingfeelingsare
inaccessible. The fear that signals potentially dangerous situations
becomes "invisible." The anger required to stand firm is absent.
Reverse labeling occurs when someone believes that anger is okay,
but fear is bad. Both feelings spring from the same physiological
sensation. Eventually, therefore, whenever the sensation occurs, he
labels it anger.
16 Fear or anxiety might be the more appropriate label for the
situation, but anger is more acceptable. He vehemently denies being
afraid of anything. The denial is honest. He doesn't know his initial
adrenaline sensation originates in fear. He seems intensely angry
because he is using the "anger" label to denote two emotions instead
of one, and he acts accordingly.
 

Page 47
The opposite phenomenon also happens. Someone who finds fear
more acceptable tends to stay with that label when the adrenaline of
anger is released. She escapes and avoids when she might more
advantageously stand firm. She feels a level of fear that seems
excessive for the occasion.
Unclear labeling occurs when someone can feel the sensation but has
been taught that more acceptable labels than "anger" or "fear" attach
to it. These labels include, but are not limited to, ''upset," "bored,''
"tired of," "hurt," and "disappointed." There is nothing inherently
incorrect about these words. Unfortunately, they aren't specific enough
to clarify which sensation is being felt. To me, "upset" means terribly
sad; to someone else, it means "angry"; to another, "afraid." These
labels lead to emotional confusion in the person who uses them and
misunderstanding in those who hear them.
One of my experiences shows how people can fail to communicate.
Somehow I have learned that "excited" means sexually aroused. I was
working in an outpatient clinic on an especially hard day when my last
client arrived. He was a sixty-seven-year-old man, balding and
toothless. He wore a dirty coat and appeared not to have had a bath in
quite a while. As I was confronting him about some of his
inappropriate behaviors, he turned to me and said, "Lorrainne, you're
getting me excited." My immediate thought was, "It's too late in the
day to deal with this kind of thing." I still thank God that I asked my
client for clarification and didn't respond according to my assumption
about the meaning of "excited." What he was trying to tell me was
that he felt angry.
The victim posture, the role taken by someone who sees self as
emotional prey for others, is a direct result of misplacing
responsibility for angry feelings. This individual focuses more on
blaming others to channel the anger, or on changing others to reduce

the anger, than on using the anger for protection and assertion of self.
Accepting responsibility for another's anger is also victimizing.
Someone whose attention and effort are focused on others' feelings
hasn't the energy to spend on personal wants and needs.
As Figure C illustrates, a person who experiences these problems is
emotionally isolated from self and others. Deprived of the feelings
information valuable to effective daily functioning, he cannot know
how to express or respond to the masked emotions when they do
surface.
Thought
When a person makes more negative than positive judgments of his
character and personality, his self-concept revolves around denying
the worthiness of self. Negative self-evaluations consist of short,
judgmental statements such
 

Page 48
as, "I'm not important," "I'm not good enough," "I don't exist," ''I'm
wrong," and "I'm worthless.'' I have also heard (although not as often)
"I'm a freak," "I'm a monster," "I'm awful."
Negative self-evaluations are instilled in children, whose minds are
extremely impressionable. The judgments internalized during
emotional trauma are the strongest and most dominant. A youngster
who grows up with punishment and abuse experiences emotional
trauma. At the same time she integrates the hurtful behaviors and
statements she hears, accepting them as direct reflections of her worth.
The result is a denying self-concept that will continue through
adulthood. Thus a sensitive, talented artist hides his deepest secret,
that he's a monster. A beautiful model thinks she is ugly.
What negative self-judgments had Nancy developed from her
situation? She told me that when she was ignored, treated as a
nonperson, she came to think, "I'm not here. I don't exist."
The person with a denying self-concept has a deep sense that he is
defective. He holds a low estimate of his value as a human being, and
responds to life in either a subhuman role or a godlike posture. In the
first role, he lives on the outskirts of life, never expecting to be seen or
recognized. In the second, he sees self as the center of the universe,
absolutely convinced that everything that happens concerns him.
A denying self-concept creates a sense of inadequacy. A person who
views reality through such a distorted glass finds a world filled with
events that seem impossible to face. He experiences mistakes as deep
wrongs that prove the accuracy of his hurtful self-image. Nothing the
individual accomplishes is good enough, important enough, or worthy
enough to relieve this felt inadequacy.
Since people hear, see, and communicate through the sieve of self-
evaluations, someone who judges self inadequate expects and hears

the same judgment from others. Each day, therefore, events pile up
which he misinterprets as threatening.
A simple statement from his supervisor, "The data is missing," he
translates as "You're incompetent" (Negative self-evaluation). The
adrenaline flows (Chemical) and anxiety begins (Emotions). He
avoids this vulnerable sensation by preparing to defend self. The
anxiety changes to anger (a powerful sensation) as the thought, "Who
does he think he is, talking to me that way!" resounds over and over
again in his mind.
A "reservoir" that creates and feeds ineffective anger does indeed fill,
but its contents are not anger. It is filled with skewed thinking. The
reservoir contains a mounting supply of negative self-evaluations that
feed the denying self-concept. The person with low self-esteem seems
filled with anger because he interprets and responds in a defensive,
angry way to events
 

Page 49
that objectively are nonthreatening. This behavior was habitual for
Nancy. Since she was always ready to protect herself, her anger was
always present, even when she wasn't aware of it.
Behavior
A person who feels a deep sense of inadequacy responds either
aggressively or depressively, directing destructive anger outward or
inward. Aggression is the response of an individual who externalizes
anger. She knows she is angry and openly attacks others. The origin of
this response, anger, is easy to recognize. The anger is visibly acted
out. In fact, someone with this style incurs labels such as "hostile,"
"arrogant," and "defiant." Mild put-downs, biting sarcasm, verbal
abuse, assault, and homicide are all aggressive behaviors. Each has its
own degree of destructive potential. Each is a violent attack on the
emotional or physical well-being of another person.
On the other side, depressive behaviors occur when a person is
unaware of his angry thoughts and feelings and directs them inward
toward self. This type of response is confusing because the behaviors
mimic the symptoms of a chemical or biological depression. Even
professional counselors have difficulty telling the difference. When
depressive behaviors are severe, there is the chance that the individual
is suffering from biological depression. Since this condition is an
illness, it needs to be diagnosed and treated by the appropriate medical
professionals. Often medications or other therapies can alleviate the
symptoms rapidly.
Another confusing aspect of depressive responses is the difficulty in
identifying anger as the source. Hidden even from self, it is often
masked with "pleasant," socially acceptable defenses. The person may
smile and laugh as though he were having a good time, while the
physiological sensation of fear and anger rises.

Some less attractive defenses, such as self-pity, also hide underlying
anger: "Poor me. I'm the one who always has to do the dishes when
company comes" is a victim statement. A more accurate expression of
feeling is, "I feel angry when I have to do dishes after company."
Whining, a self-pitying activity, and gossip and backstabbing are
behaviors that indicate anger. Pouting, Nancy's form of expression, is
another unattractive defense that masks anger.
"Why" questions which clearly do not seek information are statements
of anger turned around. For example, I was sitting in a friend's kitchen
with her four-year-old daughter. The child spilled her milk. My friend
walked in, stopped at the doorway, and asked the most ridiculous
question I've ever heard: "Why'd you spill your milk?" Did she expect
the youngster to respond,
 

Page 50
"Well, Mom, I decided to knock my elbow against the glass so I could
investigate the effects of gravity on solids and liquids"? This answer
may seem ridiculous, but there is no sensible answer to the question
because it is not meant to elicit a reply. My friend, in fact, turned
around a different message: "I feel angry that I have to mop the floor."
Many parents use this form of noncommunication: "Why isn't your
room clean?" "Why did you get an F on your report card?" or (my
personal favorite) "Why did you hit your sister?" Think of the answers
to those questions: "I didn't clean it,'' "I'm stupid," and ''She's a jerk."
A more accurate translation of each question is, "I'm angry about the
fact that your room isn't clean," "I'm angry that you got an F," and
"I'm angry about your hitting your sister."
Depressive behaviors occur in degrees of personal harm, such as mild
put-downs to self, apathy, self-mutilation, inability to maintain life
functions such as eating and hygiene, and suicide. Each of these
behaviors is violent, attacking the emotional or physical well-being of
self.
The aggressive and the depressive response styles are both
destructive. The difference is the direction toward which the
destruction is aimed. Usually nonassertive people use both styles to
express anger, although one dominates more than the other. In
situations when aggression has costly consequences, such as an
argument at the office, a person is likely to internalize the anger. An
hour later, when she feels angry at the children, consequences are low,
and an aggressive response is more probable.
A small minority of people use one style or the other exclusively.
These people eventually use the highest degree of destructiveness in
the style. The reason for the increasing intensity is not that the anger
arousal becomes so great that it overflows into an explosion or
implosion. The intensity results from the ineffectiveness of behaviors

that don't bring about desired results. When one ploy doesn't work,
these people try another of the same style, but with greater intensity.
The process continues until the final, destructive act.
Another group of people who act in extreme ways are those who have
used one style exclusively for a long time. When that style continues
to fail, and they are desperate for results, they switch to the other
style. Being in unfamiliar territory, desperate, and not knowing how to
use new behaviors, they act in extreme and often bizarre ways. I
remember an instance of this behavior that occurred many years ago
in Pennsylvania. A teenager came home from school and chopped up
his mother and his sister with an axe. He then went to the park. The
media interviewed the neighbors, asking, "What kind of boy was
Johnny?" The answers: "He was the nicest kid, a Boy Scout. He never
talked back. He was always willing to help. You'd never expect this
 

Page 51
from him." I would. It isn't normal for a teenager never to talk back, to
be so nice and always helpful. Johnny never learned to assert self.
When he finally tried, the result was extreme.
Every child learns behavioral response styles in her early home
environment and modifies them as she grows older. A youngster
learns to be aggressive when parents demonstrate that behavior as a
means to get what they want. If it is the only response style used in
front of the child, then it is the only response style learned. If a child
hears sarcasm, then she learns sarcasm. When she witnesses violent
behavior at home, she learns to be violent. A young person
communicates with put-downs if the parents interact with put-downs.
If expressions of anger are taboo at home, then self-pity, whining, and
gossip are the lessons learned. People-pleasing, which excludes the
interest of the self, is taught. A child learns depressive responses by
example and survival. She may learn the depressive response style
through trial and error, as a survival necessity. In a violent home, the
child learns that to express anger openly results in painful
repercussions from the violent parent. Internalizing anger seems safer.
The child practices this style, integrates it into her personality, and
carries it on into adulthood.
The styles of both aggressive and depressive responses may be
modified as life experience and knowledge increase. The more intense
the original learning experience, the less likely are modifications.
Unfortunately, the more intense learning experiences are those that
involve the most violence.
Nancy's experience shows how distorted anger can result in
depressive behaviors. Distorted anger, demonstrated aggressively,
follows the same process. About four years ago, I worked as a
consultant for a large city. As I walked through the city hall, I heard a
loud voice and harsh words coming from an office (Aggressive

Response). Being interested in this sort of thing, I decided to stop by.
As I entered, the man in the office hung up the phonein fact, he
slammed it down.
I introduced myself and said, "Sounds bad, whatever it is." He
launched into a tirade. "Don't they know I'm somebody!" (I'd wager a
week's pay that he has a negative self-evaluation that is close to, if not
precisely, ''I'm nobody" or ''I'm not important.") "They've reassigned
the parking spaces and put me at the other end of the lot. (Event) I'm
the Assistant Director. My space is near the door. That son of a bitch;
I'll make his life miserable!" (Thought)
To find out whether someone wanted to undercut the Assistant
Director's importance, I visited with the Department Director in
charge of planning the parking lot. He told me that parking spaces had
been reassigned to accommodate the field workers. Those who came
and went frequently from the building were given the parking spaces
closest to the doors.
 

Page 52
The placement of a person's parking space is not a realistic threat to
his adequacy as a human being. Someone with an affirming self-
concept assumes that he is somebody and doesn't need a parking space
to prove it.
When a person expresses anger destructively, whether with depressive
behaviors or aggressive ones, people react negatively. Someone who
is internalizing anger finds that others tend to avoid him. The same is
true of a person who is aggressive. Most people avoid him, and some
attack back. Whether people avoid or attack, the results are the same;
the person's hurtful self-evaluations are validated and become
stronger. His sense of inadequacy grows. The trap of destructive anger
tightens.
The trap can be unlocked. Nancy did it. I was invited by her aftercare
group to facilitate a discussion. At one point, I asked them how they
would describe their counselor. There was a common theme; firm but
fair, caring. Nancy grinned. I criedas I always do when a person
struggles and wins. I know the hard work she had done to earn that
description. The Anger Clinic was only the beginning. She worked on
exercises and continually practiced. Only with determination was she
able to release herself from the grip of distorted anger.
 

Page 53
Chapter Five 
Changing Your Experience of Anger
Both my brother and I are natural swimmers. Growing up on the
shore, we spent most of every summer's day in the water. We learned
to swim without official training or much conscious effort. Our father,
on the other hand, never had the opportunity to learn to swim when he
was a child. We tried to teach him. We told him the principles and
showed him the movements. Time and again, he tried and gave up. He
may not have been a natural swimmer, but I'm convinced that if he
had continued to try, he would have succeeded. Had he practiced his
success, he could have become a good swimmer.
The same principle applies to anger. Some people are fortunate
enough to have learned healthy anger skills during their childhood. As
adults, they have access to these skills, which come naturally. Others,
who didn't learn to develop methods to use angry feelings effectively,
have to devise new behaviors, repeatedly try them, and as the
successes occur, practice them.
This chapter presents exercises to help you use your anger
productively.
1 Because the process of an emotion is circular, changes in any area of
the anger process, whether it be in thoughts, emotions, or behaviors,
produce changes in all areas. This fact allows you to choose where
you want to begin.
I think the best results occur when a person becomes comfortable with
his emotions, and so I recommend that you do the relaxation exercise
and then begin with the exercises on emotions. Learn an exercise, try

it out, and then practice it daily. In time, the skills engaged in
constructive anger will become second nature.
 

Page 54
Relaxation
Many of the exercises in this section require relaxation. You will
therefore benefit (though it is not essential) from use of a tape
recorder and a relaxation tape. When the exercise necessitates
relaxation, go to a quiet place. Play the tape until you are relaxed and
your mind is clear. Then proceed with the exercise.
If you don't have a relaxation tape, these steps are one way to relax:
1. Take a deep breath; hold it to the count of three.
2. Slowly let it out while mentally thinking the word "relax."
3. Take another deep breath; hold it to the count of three.
4. Slowly let it out while mentally thinking the word "relax."
5. Tighten both fists; count to three.
6. Open your fists and relax.
7. Take another deep breath; hold it to the count of three.
8. Slowly let it out while mentally thinking the word "relax."
Then proceed with the exercise.
Because anger is a product of anxiety, it can be helpful to reduce
adrenaline during any stressful situation. This goal is easily
accomplished by surreptitiously doing steps 1-4.
 

Page 55
Emotions
Because anger is an emotion, it is important to become comfortable
with feelings in general and then with anger specifically. Therefore,
the first four exercises deal with feelings other than anger. I
recommend that you work through this material before moving on.
Besides anger, humans experience only six basic emotions. All other
feeling words describe either combinations or various intensities of
these. To avoid the pitfalls involved with expressing emotions,
complete the exercises using only the basic feeling labels given in the
next exercise.
If you can't feel angry when you need to assert yourself, the following
exercises will help you:
· Replacing Misinformation about Anger
· Uses of Anger
· Replacing Unclear Labels
If you have difficulty experiencing the fear and anxiety that anger
defends, or if you tend to blame outside sources for either your anger
or your fear, the following exercises will be helpful:
· Replacing Misinformation about Anger
· Taking Responsibility
· Owning the Fear
Each Emotion Has a Purpose
You may have been brought up in a home where many taboos
controlled emotions and their expression. If so, you have been taught
that it's not okay to feel. If feelings were unacceptable, you had no
need to learn what a feeling is or how to label it. This situation makes

it very difficult to experience, use, and communicate feelings in a
productive way.
The first step in overcoming your experience is to re-educate yourself
by proving that the taboos which imply the "badness" of a feeling are
false beliefs. On the contrary, every feeling is good. Each has a
specific purpose that enhances your ability to cope with life, as well as
to ensure the survival of the human race.
 

Page 56
Feeling the Emotion
Many people mislabel the feeling experience by applying one label to
most of their physiological sensations. They then behave according to
that label. In order to express your feelings clearly, you need to
distinguish the various sensations and name them accurately.
The following exercise requires that you be relaxed. Go to a quiet
place. Get comfortable. Play the tape or deep breathe to the count of
three until you are relaxed and your mind is clear.
Do only one or two of these visualizations at each sitting. Make sure
that you relax and clear your mind after each one. It is best to end
each sitting by visualizing gladness.
As you follow the directions, note your body's physical reactions.
These reactions are the feeling.
Gladness
Remember a moment of success. Go over the hard work, the labor
involved in achieving this success. Then put yourself into the moment

of completionthat point when you looked at the finished product and
knew it was a job well done.
 

Page 57
Sadness

Page 58
Fear
Anger

Page 59
"Feeling Labels" and "Feeling Statements"
It is important to know how to express feelings verbally by choosing
"feeling labels" and "feeling statements" that are clear and precise.
Below is a guide that will help when you search for a word to describe
a feeling and form a sentence to convey this information to another:
1. Become familiar with the basic feeling labels. These are listed
below, followed by other labels that describe different nuances of the
emotion:
Afraidnervous, scared, terrified
Sadunhappy, mournful
Guiltyashamed, remorseful
Inadequateembarrassed, humiliated
Lonelylonesome
Angryannoyed, irritated, irate, furious, enraged
Gladcontent, relieved, satisfied, happy, joyous
2. If you use the words "that" or "like" with the feeling label, you are
expressing a thought or an opinion, not a feeling.
EXAMPLE: I feel that you have done a good job.
TRANSLATES TO: I think you have done a good job.
Notice that this sentence offers no information about the internal
physiological reaction.
3. If you can substitute the word "think" for the word "feel" in your
feeling statement and it still makes sense, you are stating a thought,
not a feeling.

EXAMPLE: I feel he is making a mistake.
TRANSLATES TO: I think he is making a mistake.
This is a judgment, an interpretation of the external event, not a
description of your internal response.
 

Page 60
4. Feeling labels are adjectives that describe the physiological
sensation within your body. Their purpose is to convey information
about you. Therefore:
A. Do not use an adjective to describe a situation in which more than
one feeling is possible.
EXAMPLE: I feel different (powerless, lost, hurt, dizzy, confused).
One person may be happy to be different, another may be afraid, and
another may be sad.
B. Avoid using a verb as a feeling label. Verbs denote action,
judgment, and blame.
EXAMPLE: I feel cheated.
This statement says that someone did something that you judge as
cheating, and whatever physiological sensation you have is that
person's fault. Other verbs commonly misused as feeling labels are:
blamed, betrayed, abandoned, distanced, rejected, neglected, etc.
5. When you can substitute "am" for "feel" in your feeling statement,
there is a high probability that you are describing a feeling.
EXAMPLE: I feel happy. I am happy.
 

Page 61
The Feeling Formula
If you want your feelings to be useful tools, take possession of them;
own your perception that created them, and be careful not to blame
either on others. A simple formula may help you:
I FEEL (feeling label) WHEN I (how you see the event).
EXAMPLE: I feel afraid when I speak in front of a crowd.
 


Page 62
Practice in Stating Feelings
Below are two more exercises that you can do to familiarize yourself
with feeling labels and feeling statements.
Watching an Old Movie
Nightly Review

Page 63
Replacing Misinformation about Anger
If you have difficulty feeling anger, you need to begin by giving
yourself permission. Try to replace misinformation with facts. The
misconceptions about anger discussed in chapter 4 and their refuting
truths are as follows:
· Anger Is an Accusation; Anger Equals Disapproval. Anger is an
internal physiological reaction to an extenal event. The person who is
angry is protecting self from a perceived threat. It has nothing to do
with another's ''rightness'' or "wrongness."
· Anger Is Dangerous. Anger itself is not dangerous, harmful, or
violent. Anger is internal. The way some people act out their anger
may be dangerous. But these actions are behavior, not feeling.
· Ladies Don't Get Angry. I am sure there are many things a lady
doesn't do. Feeling angry isn't one of them. All human beings, not just
men, can benefit from anger.
· Anger Is Bad. Anger is neither good nor bad. It has a function.
When used as intended, it is productive and useful.
· Anger Is a Sin. It is not a sin to feel angry. If you believe it is un-
Christian to experience anger, read the New Testament again and
think about Christ's emotional responses.
· The Other Person Is Responsible. Each person is responsible for his
own feelings, including anger. No one can reach in and turn on the
adrenaline switch for another. That switch is turned on by the person's
own interpretation of the event.
Review "What Your Answers Show about Attitudes" in chapter 1. Are
there any pieces of misinformation about anger that you discovered
there that aren't discussed above? Was anger used in your upbringing
as a device for punishment, control, attack, threat, manipulation, or

other purposes? Whatever you witnessed then, you absorbed as the
proper uses of anger. And that may be false information which
impedes the productive use of anger.
 

Page 64

Page 65
Uses of Anger

Page 66
Replacing Unclear Labels
Now say each sentence out loud. You don't have to feel it; just say it.
Go to a quiet place. Using a relaxation tape or breathing to the count
of three, clear your mind. Relive the scene that involved the unclear
label. As you visualize the scene, replace the unclear label with the
word "angry."
 


Page 67
Replacing Misinformation about Fear
If you think that you experience anger more often than others do,
perhaps you are unable to recognize and label the fear and anxiety
sensation that precedes anger. Misinformation could be keeping you
from experiencing fear. Here are three common misconceptions about
fear, followed by the truth:
· Fear Is Bad. Every feeling has a function. The human race wouldn't
be here today, you would not be here today, if it weren't for fear. It is
the physiological sensation that signals danger. It readies the body for
action when threat is near. It is fear that slams on the brakes when you
are driving sixty miles an hour down the highway and a car cuts you
off. It is fear that saves your life.
· Men Don't Feel Fear. Fear, or the lack of it, has nothing to do with
manhood. The real point is whether you use your fear in an intelligent
way. Do you get out of situations where there is nothing to be won
and you would be hurt by the fight? Do you stay to fight in situations
that are important? Can you tell the difference? It is the choice of
flight or fight. If you aren't able to experience fear, you are always
stuck in the fight.
· Fear Is the Lack of Courage. It is not courageous to be devoid of
fear. Courage is feeling fear and performing the necessary task
anyway. If the task isn't necessary or meaningful to you, why risk it?
Only fools and robots never feel afraid.
List the false lessons you were taught about fear during your early
life. Remember that you learn not only from what is said, but from
what people do or don't do. Then disprove each of these
misconceptions by writing accurate information.

“True Information


Page 68

Page 69
Taking Responsibility
You cannot use anger productively until you stop blaming others for
your angry feelings. The following type of sentence helps to do this:
I FEEL (angry) WHEN I THINK (how you see the event).
EXAMPLE: I feel angry when I think you are putting me down.
 


Page 70
Owning the Fear
Another feeling formula, which helps you take responsibility for your
angry feelings, involves the fact that anger is a protective device that
acts as a defense to hide fear. This formula is:
I FEEL (angry) WHEN I'M (a label for fear).
EXAMPLE: I feel angry when I'm nervous.
 

Page 71
Thoughts
When you are making changes in thinking, it doesn't matter whether
you have difficulty feeling anger or you seem to feel it too often. The
core element in both situations is an image of your identity that denies
your worthiness as a human being. Problems of thought that maintain
a denying self-concept and thereby affect anger are misinterpretation
of the event, inaccurate judgments of self and others, and excessive
negative self-statements.
The following exercises, practiced on a regular, consistent basis, help
to alleviate such problems:
· Reinterpreting the Event
· Daily Review
· Stopping the Judgments
· Judging Self More Accurately
· Judging Others More Accurately
· Developing Positive Self-Statements
 

Page 72
Reinterpreting the Event

Page 73

Page 74
Daily Review
If you are like most human beings, you tend to replay angry incidents
over and over in your mind. In doing so, you continue to use the
original assessment of the situation. If that assessment was inaccurate,
you are reinforcing a misinterpretation. Future interactions with the
people involved or future similar experiences will reactivate the
misinterpretation, influencing your emotional and behavioral
responses. In order to step out of this destructive circle, evaluate the
accuracy of your interpretations as soon as possible.
Before retiring for the evening, review your day. When did you feel
angry? How did you interpret what was said or done? What are three
other interpretations of the event? Did you take what was said
personally, when it wasn't meant that way?
If you can't think of other interpretations, then either your
interpretation is accurate and you need to take positive action to assert
self, or your interpretation is inaccurate and you need assistance in
reinterpreting the event. One way to obtain this assistance is to ask a
friend for possible interpretations. Another way is to approach the
other person involved in the angry incident. In a nonaccusatory
manner, explain your understanding of what was said or done and ask
whether that meaning was intended.

‘Write down your review using the format below. Do this exercise
daily until you discover yourself doing it automatically when you feel angry

Event

Interpretation

Possible Interpretation

Possible Interpretation —

Possible Interpretation

Page 75

Page 76
Stopping the Judgments
Often harsh, punitive, angry feelings are continually heightened by
inaccurate judgments. These judgments tend to dehumanize the
person at whom they are aimed. They make her into an object of
scorn, something worthy of attack or insult. Self or others may be the
target of these judgments. When you remove them from your
thoughts, the intensity of your anger diminishes, and you find it
difficult to use your anger destructively.
How you evaluate yourself after you make a mistake is often an
inaccurate, overly harsh judgment. For instance, after I make a
mistake, I mentally hear myself saying, ''Damn it. I can't do anything
right.'' This judgment is inaccurate. I do many things right. It just
happens I erred on this one. Other self-judgments that people have
shared with me are, "I'm stupid," "I'm a jerk," "I'm no good."
Inaccurate judgments about others also heighten and regenerate anger.
Remember times when you have been angry with someone. What
"names" did you call that person? These "names" could be thoughts or
actual verbalizations. In either case, they are usually judgments that
are extreme and dehumanizing. One of my personal favorites, when a
colleague makes a mistake that affects me, is mentally to call him an
"idiot." This denunciation is inaccurate. I know that he is a highly
intelligent man who, in this particular instance, happens to have made
a mistake.
 

Page 77
Judging Self More Accurately
Now, say each judgment out loud, followed by the word STOP, three
times.
EXAMPLE: I can't do anything rightSTOP.
Say this sentence again three times, adding the reason the judgment is
incorrect.
EXAMPLE: I can't do anything rightSTOPThat's wrong, I do many
things right.
As you go through your day, listen for the inaccurate judgments you
make about yourself. Use this technique to replace these false, hurtful
judgments with more truthful, gentler ones.
 

Page 78
Judging Others More Accurately
Now, say each judgment out loud, followed by the word STOP, three
times.
EXAMPLE: He's an idiotSTOP.
Say the judgment again three times, adding why it is incorrect.
EXAMPLE: He's an idiotSTOPThat's incorrect, he's a highly
intelligent man who made a mistake.
As you go through your day, listen for the inaccurate judgments that
you make about others. Use this technique to replace these incorrect,
hurtful judgments with more accurate, gentler ones.
 

Page 79
Developing Positive Self-Statements
An affirming self-concept exists when your positive statements about
yourself outnumber negative ones. When a thought is imprinted on the
brain, it remains there forever. It can be removed only by trauma or
organic deterioration. Your mind is not like a tape recorder; the
negative evaluations that you have internalized about yourself cannot
be taken out, erased, or printed over.
The only way to change a denying self-concept to an affirming one is
to increase the number of positive self-statements so that they
dominate the negative ones. This technique is most effective when the
new statements counteract the negative evaluations.
To discover your strongest negative self-statements, remember the
times you were punished or reprimanded as a child. What was said to
you? How did you personalize these events as evaluations of self? If
nothing was said to youfor instance, you were sent to your room or
ignoredhow did you evaluate yourself? Because these evaluations do
not describe what you did, but who you are as a human being, they
aren't true. You are not a bad person because you didn't clean your
room, or you forgot to take the garbage out, or you received a poor
grade, or you fought with your sister. I don't even know for sure that
these behaviors are bad; I do know that you are not. Unfortunately, it
is not enough for me to know this fact. You need to believe it.
 

Page 80

Page 81

Page 82
Behaviors
There are two types of assertive behaviors. The first is an immediate
event, which occurs at the moment your self-esteem is threatened. The
second is a series of actions you undertake to alleviate situations that
are a constant assault on your image of self as a person worthy of
respect. Both acts require you to recognize your anger and then assert
self without harming yourself or someone else.
If you tend to turn anger inward and have difficulty expressing it, the
following exercises will be helpful:
· "I'm Angry" Is Okay
· Saying "I'm Angry" Is Okay
If the way you express anger is basically aggressive, the following
exercises will help you become more assertive:
· Reducing the Anger Arousal
· Options Other Than Aggression
· Interrupting an Aggressive Response
One last exercise helps you plan an assertive process:
· Taking Action
 

Page 83
"I'm Angry" Is Okay
If you are more likely to berate yourself than to blame others, you
may need to begin by giving yourself permission to say the labels that
indicate anger. Do the exercise "Replacing Unclear Labels" (p. 66) in
the section of this chapter about emotions.
Behaviors that indicate unfelt anger are self-pity, "why" questions, and
action verbs used as feeling labels.
 


Page 84
Saying "I'm Angry" Is Okay
Review the behaviors you have listed that indicate you may be angry.
Now go to a quiet place. Relax and clear your mind by using a
relaxation tape or breathing to the count of three.
Replay each incident separately, replacing the nonassertive behavior
with the statement about your anger. Play the scene through to the
end. When you have finished replaying all the incidents, ask yourself
the following questions:
· Was the outcome what you feared would happen if you expressed
your anger?
· How did others react in your new scenario?
· How did you feel about yourself afterwards?
Tomorrow, as you go through your day, be aware of your behaviors
that indicate anger. When one occurs with someone you trust, use an
assertive statement to tell him that you feel angry. You don't have to
shout your anger. You don't have to look angry. Just say the words:
Remember, you will merely be presenting information about yourself
to that person. Therefore, you don't have to explain your feeling,
justify it, or defend it. Don't be drawn into an argument. My response
to someone who attempts to draw me into an argument is, "I just
wanted you to know how I was feeling."
Reducing the Anger Arousal
Some people have told me that they deal with their aggressive
tendencies by doing some physical activity to reduce the anger before
they use it destructively. Exercise lowers the adrenaline that causes
the sensation of anger, but it does not change the thoughts that

produced the adrenaline. When these thoughts return, so does the
anger and the possibility of aggression.
If you have used physical activity to reduce your anger, I recommend
that you continue. Or if you think this approach may work for you,
give it a try.
After the level of adrenaline and anger drops, review the exercises in
the thought section of this chapter. This strategy will help to change
unrealistic perceptions of threats, and you may discover yourself
requiring less physical activity.
 

Page 85
Options Other Than Aggression
It is perfectly healthy and normal to feel angry. It is not helpful to you
or to other people when you use that anger to do harm. The problem is
not that you feel anger; what matters is what you do with it. To change
an aggressive response, you need to interrupt the process before you
attack.
 


Page 86
Interrupting an Aggressive Response
Go to a quiet place. Relax and clear your mind by using a relaxation
tape or breathing to the count of three. Review the aggressive episodes
you listed. Try to remember the point at which you began feeling
angry. Replay the first episode and, when you arrive at that point,
think ''STOP.''
Now continue to imagine the episode using the option you chose.
Repeat this procedure for all the aggressive episodes you wrote down.
When you finish, ask yourself the following questions:
· How did others react to my new option?
· How did I feel about myself afterwards?
Tomorrow, as you go through your day, be aware of the point when
your anger starts. Then, just once, when you feel the anger begin,
think "STOP." Say the option you feel most comfortable using.
Tomorrow evening, as you review your day, ask yourself:
· How did others react to my "new" expression of anger?
· How did I feel about myself afterwards?
· How does this feeling compare to the feelings you have after hurting
someone with your anger?
Taking Action

you are in a situation in which you are constantly unhappy or angry. now
‘may be the time for change. The responsibly for your happiness or your
anger is yours. The person responsible for change is therefore you.

Belore answering the questions below, review the passages about

‘behavior in chapters 3 and 4
‘Whats the problem that elicits your emotional response? Be specific.

What do you need. and what can you do to get i?


Page 87
As you begin working through these exercises and practicing them in
your daily activities, people will respond differently to you. Some
won't know how to react and will avoid you. This reaction may
disturb you. On the other hand, as you use your angry feelings to
assert self, and your anger becomes less hurtful, others will want to
spend more time with you. Over time you will discover that these
relationships become deeper and stronger.
As people decide whether to be with the new you, you too will also
choose your own companions. Your decisions may lead you away
from people you formerly sought and toward those you previously
wouldn't have chosen. You will realize that friends who batter your
self-esteem with put-downs and sarcasm hold you back. You may
develop an aversion to them. Those who tend to enhance your self-
esteem by honest support and positive feedback are those who attract
you.
 

Page 89
Chapter Six 
Responding to Another Person 's Anger
My husband yells about the bills; my girlfriend gets angry and avoids
me; my boss goes into a tirade about things that are beyond my
control; my coworker talks about me behind my back and thinks I
don't know it. Clients have made these statements and a multitude of
others and then asked me how they should deal with the other person's
anger. I routinely answer, "As an adult." This reply may seem simple,
even flippant; it is neither.
The greatest problem in encountering another's anger is that people
return to a child's perspective of powerlessness and vulnerability and
react on childhood misinformation. For instance, you don't have to
"deal" with any other person's anger. The angry feeling is his. It's his
adrenaline. Therefore, it is his responsibility to deal with it. In fact, he
is the only person who can deal with it. Your responsibility is merely
to respond in a way that you hope will open the door to greater trust
and intimacy. The more you know about anger and the more work
you've done concerning your own angry feelings, the easier your role
will be. Therefore, make sure you've completed the preceding five
chapters before you attempt this one. If you put forth some effort and
follow four basic guidelines, you will be able to respond effectively to
another person's anger.
If you suspect that the person's anger will be expressed violentlyget
away!
No one has the right to strike or harm you. You are not anyone's
punching bag. You are a human being. As a human being, you do not
have to remain in a place, or near a person, where danger is an
imminent possibility. Leave!


Page 90
Get away from the source of potential harm!
There are no exceptions to this guideline. If you are in a situation in
which you have been physically assaulted, seek professional advice.
There are counselors and groups at shelters, mental health clinics, and
social service departments whose main purpose is to assist people who
are in potentially violent situations. Understand several facts:
· You did not cause the violent behavior.
· The behavior will not automatically stop.
· You have the right to seek assistance.
Understand and attempt to use your own anger productively.
As long as you believe the misinformation about anger that you have
carried since childhood, and as long as your own anger causes you
intense discomfort, you won't be able to respond effectively to other
people's angry feelings. You won't be able to listen properly to the
person's message, or to respond assertively if she expresses her anger
aggressively. I therefore recommend that you review the informational
areas and the exercises in this manual again to be sure that you have
attained enough understanding and comfort with your own anger to be
effective when you respond to another's.
Assert self when verbally attacked.
If the first guideline is satisfied and you don't think you are in danger
of physical harm, stand firm against any verbal put-downs. The well-
being of your self-concept is integral to your physical, as well as your
emotional health. Protect it. Be assertive without being aggressive.
Everyone has the right to feel angry, but they do not have the right to
use that anger to hurt others. I use three basic responses when friends,
coworkers, or intimates express their anger in the form of verbal

attack: "I'm willing to listen to you as long as you stop the attack"; "I
want to hear what you're angry about, and I can't while you put me
down"; or, a more adamant response, "You don't have the right to
attack me that way. If you want me to listen, stop the put-downs."
Neither you nor I can make a person stop a verbal attack. If you've
used an assertive statement and the individual continues put-downs,
your role is to assert self. You may excuse yourself and leave. As an
alternative, you can ask the other person to leave. If the attacks are
ongoing, you begin the assertive process necessary to change your
situation. In any of these scenar-
 

Page 91
ios, you have made it possible for your affirming self-concept to
remain intact.
Respond as one adult human being to another.
After you have observed the first three guidelines, your own
expectations may still obstruct your responding in a productive way
when someone else is angry. These expectations you learned in
childhood, when you were vulnerable and relatively powerless.
Review the questions, "What Are Your Expectations?" and "How Did
You Respond?" in chapter 1. What you find there reveals how you
have been conditioned to respond. If your conditioning includes the
expectation of harm, accusation, or punishment, you probably defend
against or ward off an attack, even if you are not being attacked. You
interpret the anger through the distorting glass of your childhood
experience. That interpretation produces a child's response, modified
for an adult's use. (Review your answers to the question "How Do
You Respond to Anger?" in chapter 1.) If you are intent on preparing
your defense, you can't accurately hear what the angry person is
saying to you. You miss the "now.'' Because your interpretation of the
present is based on your history rather than on what is actually being
said, your response can't help but be ineffective.
Therefore, the first objective in responding to someone's anger is
movement beyond old expectations and interpretations. That goal
accomplished, you are in a better position to hear what others say to
you. You may make this change in two steps: interrupt your old
expectations with a "now" statement, and command yourself to listen.
Anger is a form of communication. What is the person trying to tell
you? Does she see self as trapped, cheated, treated unfairly? The only
way to find out is to LISTEN.
For example, if you expect anger to be punishing and a friend
expresses angry feelings, you can slow down your reactions by

practicing several strategies:
1. As you begin to tense, think "STOP!"
2. Take a breath, hold it to the count of three, and let it out slowly.
3. Mentally negate the expectation with a "now" statement such as,
"This person can't punish me. He is a peer."
4. Tell yourself to listen. "I'll just listen to hear what he's angry about."
The next objective is to reply to your friend's message. Speak
specifically to what you heard him say. Do not generalize with such
answers as "I know how you feel," or "I understand your anger."
These statements sound condescend-
 

Page 92
ing and empty. Let your friend hear back in your own words what you
heard him say to you.
Suppose you think your friend is saying that he thinks you cheated
him. Maybe at the beginning of the summer you had sold him a boat
and a week later the motor gave out. He had to replace it. Make sure
you are hearing him clearly by asking, "Are you telling me that you
think I've cheated you?" If the answer is no, ask for further
clarification. Let him know you are trying to understand. If the answer
is yes, ask for specific details about his accusation. Ask if he believes
that you sold him the boat knowing that the motor was about to break.
After listening to the details, your next response demands a deep level
of honesty. If he is right, and you did cheat him, tell him the truth; ask
whether together you can develop a means of replacing the motor that
is fair to both of you. This honesty and compromise may seem
difficult, but it is the way mature, responsible adults behave. They
take responsibility for their actions. They don't deny, lie, or hide from
their mistakes. Children who are afraid of severe punishment from
their more powerful parents have a need for these clandestine
behaviors, but mature adults do not. Such subterfuge only adds to a
denying self-concept.
If you did not cheat your friend, if you did not know about the
deficiencies in the motor, present the facts. When the facts are real,
you need not argue them or defend them. They can stand on their
own. There is nothing you can do if your friend won't accept them.
Just present the facts and let him decide for himself whether to persist
in thinking you cheated. You have done your part. The rest is up to
him. It is his interpretation of events. It is his anger.
 


Page 93
Interrupting Expectations
The most important part of an effective reply when someone confronts
you in anger is listening for a clear, undistorted message. Learned
expectations interfere with your ability to hear what is actually said.
You can interrupt your conditioned expectations with appropriate
"now" statements.
Go to a quiet place. Relax and clear your mind by using a relaxation
tape or breathing to the count of three. Replay the angry situation in
your mind.
When you begin to feel tense, think "STOP!"
Take a deep breath, count to three, and slowly let it out. 
Think the "now" statement. 

Do this same procedure for each situation that you listed.
 

Page 94
Listening and Clarifying

Page 95
Emotions were never meant to be destructive or harmful. In fact, the
opposite is true. An emotion is a physiological sensation, the same as
hunger. Like hunger, which signals the need for nourishment, each
feeling functions to satisfy or warn of a human need. For this reason,
feelings cannot be classified as "good" or "bad," ''positive" or
"negative." They are merely utilitarian. It is therefore
counterproductive to curb or control emotions, release them, resolve
them, or ventilate them. Instead, it is necessary to recognize each
feeling, understand its function, and then choose a behavior that
responds to that function.
Human beings do not have to learn, but are naturally constituted to
experience emotions. They must learn what each feeling is and its
possible functions. Then, to obtain the desired effects, they must learn
the most productive ways of expressing and reacting to that feeling.
When these learning processes are interrupted, carried out
inadequately, or totally ignored in a person's life, the results are
ineffective, at the least, and at worst, extremely harmful. On the other
hand, when taught well, emotions are tools for effective living.
Anger is no exception. With the deadline for this book pressing closer,
I wanted to take a day off from my job and write. Having a good
working relationship with my boss, I called her at home and asked, "If
I don't come in today, will you be terribly angry?" She said "Yes." My

next question to her was, "Will I live through the consequences of that
and have a job?" She replied, "Yes.'' I took the day off. It was not her
angry feeling that worried me, but the behavior that she might use to
express that anger had me on edge. That principle applies to anyone's
anger. It is not the emotion that is destructive, but the way a person
expresses it.
Since my boss is not a vindictive person, my anxiety over a lost job
had little to do with her and much more to do with memy fears and
my learned expectations. Once I could put those to rest with more
accurate in-
 

Page 96
formation, I was free to make a decision based on my priorities and
not on potential, irrational interpretations. If she had said, "Yes, you
will lose your job," I would have had a valid perception of reality.
And that valuable piece of information would have become a strong
variable in my decision. I probably would have gone to work.
You may be thinking, "You're lucky. You have a decent boss. Mine's a
jerk." Luck had very little to do with it. Anger was much more
important. The master's degree that I sought in 1982 because of angry
feelings toward a supervisor opened up a world of options. I can now
choose whether or not to work for a jerk.
When a person can recognize and understand her own anger, it
becomes like a friend, a part of her life that brings enrichment. This
relationship with her own anger enables her to stop being intimidated
by other people's anger. These two results provide her with the
freedom to make her own choices and the incentive to act on those
choices.
 

Page 99
Notes
Chapter Two
Taking a New Perspective on Anger
1. Edmund Jacobson, Biology of Emotions (Springfield, [1].: Charles
C. Thomas, 1967), presents a more detailed explanation of the
physiology of emotions.
2. Norma D. Feshback and Kiki Roe, "Empathy in Six-and Seven-
Year-Olds," Child Development 39 (1968): 133-45, used the four
feeling themes of happiness, sadness, fear, and anger to measure
conditions that encourage empathy.
3. Harvey A. Hornstein, Cruelty and Kindness. A New Look at
Aggression and Altruism (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall,
1976), 13-31, describes research studies he conducted that revolve
around boundaries established by "we" vs. "they" attitudes. Not only
do these attitudes lead to bonding for the "we" group, but they also
heighten aggression toward group members of the ''they'' group. The
way to lower aggression is to create social situations that increase the
bonding of "we" and lower the boundaries established by a "they"
perspective.
4. Albert Rothenberg, "On Anger," American Journal of Psychiatry
128 (October 1971): 458.
Chapter Three
Acknowledging the Complexities of Anger
1. David N. Daniels, Marshall F. Gilula, and Frank M. Ochberg, eds.,
Violence and the Struggle for Existence (Boston: Little, Brown, 1970),
provides a more complete account of the many various theories about

aggression.
2. John R. Marshall, "The Expression of Feelings," Archives of
General Psychiatry 27 (December 1972): 786-90, reviews studies
involving the free expression of feelings. He concludes that evidence
supporting the therapy models of ventilation is inconclusive. In
addition, research findings that treat aggression specifically raise
strong doubts about the usefulness of ventilation as a means of
reducing aggressive behavior.
Murray Straus, "Leveling, Civility, and Violence in the Family,"
Journal of Marriage and the Family 36 (February 1974): 18,
conducted a study of 385 couples to test the hypothesis that verbal
expression of aggressive feelings lowers physical aggression. He
found the opposite: "As the level of verbal aggression increases, the
level of physical aggression increases dramatically."
3. Michael Kahn, "The Physiology of Catharsis," Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 3 (1966): 278-86, is a study of
thirty-six male freshmen, aroused to a state of anger and assigned
catharsis or noncatharsis conditions. The subjects' automatic
responses were then measured for a twenty-minute recovery period.
Catharsis did not lower the physiological arousal of anger.
4. Marshall, "The Expression of Feelings," 788.
5. Rothenberg, "On Anger," 458.
6. Ernest Becker, "Anthropological Notes on the Concept of
Aggression," Psychiatry 25 (1962): 328-38, and Raymond W.
Novaco, "The Functions and Regulation of the Arousal of Anger,"
American Journal of Psychiatry 133 (October 1976): 1124-27,
contend that anger protects integrity and self-esteem, a concept that is
integral to the model presented in this guide.
 


Page 100
Loren Pankratz, Philip Levendusky, and Vincent Glaudin, 'The
Antecedents of Anger in a Sample of College Students," Journal of
Psychology 92 (March 1976): 173-78.
7. Rothenberg, "On Anger," 458-59.
Hossain B. Danesh, "Anger and Fear," American Journal of
Psychiatry 134 (October 1977): 1109-12, explores the connection
between fear and anxiety, and anger.
8. Robert A. Green and Edward J. Murray, "Instigation to Aggression
as a Function of Self-disclosure and Threat to Self-esteem," Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology 40 (1973): 440-43, found that,
after self-disclosure a person is most vulnerable and self-esteem more
easily threatened.
9. David C. Rimm, et al., "Group-Assertive Training in Treatment of
Expression of Inappropriate Anger," Psychological Reports 34
(1974): 791-98, divided male volunteers who reported a history of
aggression into a group trained in assertiveness and a placebo group.
Those who received training showed significantly greater
improvement in handling anger productively than the placebo group.
10. Danesh, "Anger and Fear," explores the three stages of fear and
anger and the patterns these emotions take as protective mechanisms.
11. Danesh, "Anger and Fear," 1111.
Pankratz, Levendusky, and Glaudin, 'The Antecedents of Anger."
Chapter Four
Understanding How Anger Goes Awry
1. Arnold H. Buss, "Physical Aggression in Relation to Different
Frustrations," Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 67 (1983):
1-7, explores the well-known connection between frustration and

aggression by investigating three kinds of frustration and the impact
each has on college students' aggression. He contends that the likely
influence of the aggressive behavior is a greater determiner of
aggression than the type of frustration.
Simply put, if a person thinks aggression will overcome an
obstacle, he is more likely to act aggressively.
2. Albert Bandura, Dorothea Ross, and Sheila A. Ross, "Imitation of
Film-Mediated Aggressive Models," Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology 66 (1963): 3-11, demonstrate that aggression is learned,
not only by imitating live role-models, but also by imitating actors on
television and in movies.
3. Albert Bandura, Aggression: A Social Learning Analysis
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1973), presents a thorough
explanation of the "social learning theory" concept that aggression is
culturally permitted and mediated.
Carol Tavris, Anger: The Misunderstood Emotion (New York:
Simon & Schuster, 1982), describes various cultural rites
concerning anger and aggression.
4. Buss, "Physical Aggression," 2.
5. Rothenberg, "On Anger," 460.
6. Novaco, 'The Functions and Regulation of the Arousal of Anger,"
1125, discusses the defense of ego as a function of anger: "Anger
externalizes the conflict by directing attention to something that is
nonself...."
 

Page 101
7. Rothenberg, "On Anger," 459. Not only do people remember
experiences of threat, anxiety, and anger, but Dr. Rothenberg also
contends that these memories influence people's perception
throughout life. They engender a predisposition to anxiety and anger
in relation to situations and persons.
8. Damaris J. Rohsenow and Ronald E. Smith, "Irrational Beliefs as
Predictors of Negative Affective States," Motivation and Emotion 6
(1982): 299-314.
9. Rohsenow and Smith, "Irrational Beliefs," 306-311.
10. Raymond W. Novaco, "Stress Inoculation: A Cognitive Therapy
for Anger and Its Application to a Case of Depression," Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology 47 (1977): 600608.
11. Danesh, "Anger and Fear," 1111-1112, links the two feelings.
Novaco, "Stress Inoculation," 601-607, links anger and depression.
12. Rothenberg, "On Anger," 456-57.
13. Christopher A. Innes, "Drug Use and Crime," Bureau of Justice
Statistics (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, July 1988),
conducted this survey in 1986.
14. Feshback and Roe, "Empathy in Six-and Seven-Year-Olds,"
discovered that a significant number of boys have difficulty labeling
fear.
15. Claudeen Cline-Naffziger, "Women's Lives and Frustration,
Oppression and Anger: Some Alternatives," Journal of Counseling
Psychology 21 (January 1974): 51-56, and Harriet E. Lerner, "Internal
Prohibitions Against Female Anger," American Journal of
Psychoanalysis 40 (1980): 137-48, both recognize this idea.
16. Stuart R. Garrison and Arnold Stolberg, "Modification of Anger in

Children by Affective Imagery Training," Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology 11 (1983): 115-30, discuss the phenomenon of
mislabeling aroused states. They explain that anger may be used by
some people as a label for all physiological responses. Although their
study is about children, I believe that it generalizes to adults.
Chapter Five
Changing Your Experience of Anger
1. I have been a counselor since 1977 and a workshop presenter since
1982. In these roles, I have worked with many professionals who
willingly shared their skills, techniques, and therapeutic exercises. I
am sure that pieces of their work are in the exercises presented in this
chapter.
Throughout my professional life, I have listened to lectures on
counseling techniques and approaches and read a multitude of
journal articles and books. All of this input influenced the way I try
to assist people's quest for effective ways to use anger. Below are
the studies that I remember had the greatest impact on developing
the presented exercises:
Stuart R. Garrison and Arnold Stolberg, "Modification of Anger in
Children by Affective Imagery Training," Journal of Abnormal
Child Psychology 11 (1983): 115-30.
Donald H. Meichenbaum and Joseph Goodman, "Training
Impulsive Children to Talk to Themselves: A Means of Developing
Self-contol," Journal of Abnormal Psychology 77 (1971): 115-26.
Raymond W. Novaco, "Stress Inoculation: A Cognitive Therapy for
Anger and Its Application to a Case of Depression," Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology 47 (1977): 600-608.
 


Page 102
Paul W. Kettlewell and Donald F. Kausch, The Generalization of
the Effects of a Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment Program for
Aggressive Children," Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology
11(1983): 101-14.
James G. Hollandsworth, "Differentiating Assertion and
Aggression: Some Behavioral Guidelines," Behavior Therapy 8
(1977): 347-52.
David C. Rimm, et al., "Group-Assertive Training in Treatment of
Expression of Inappropriate Anger," Psychological Reports 34
(1974): 791-98.
Mema Dee Galassi and John P. Galassi, "Modifying Assertive and
Aggressive Behavior Through Assertion Training," Journal of
College Student Personnel 19 (September 1978): 453-56.
Harriet Goldhor Lerner, The Dance of Anger (New York: Harper &
Row, 1985). When people ask, "What book can I read that will help
me with my anger?," I recommend this one. Although it
specifically speaks to women, I find most of the material
appropriate to men also.
 

Page 103
Bibliography
Bandura, Albert. Aggression: A Social Learning Analysis. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ.: Prentice-Hall, 1973.
Bandura, Albert, Dorothea Ross, and Sheila A. Ross. "Imitation of
Film-Mediated Aggressive Models." Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology 66 (1963): 3-11.
Becker, Ernest. "Anthropological Notes on the Concept of
Aggression." Psychiatry 25 (1962): 328-38.
Buss, Arnold H. "Physical Aggression in Relation to Different
Frustrations." Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 67 (1983):
1-7.
Cline-Naffziger, Claudeen. "Women's Lives and Frustration,
Oppression and Anger: Some Alternatives." Journal of Counseling
Psychology 21 (January 1974): 51-56.
Danesh, Hossain B. "Anger and Fear." American Journal of
Psychiatry 134 (October 1977): 1109-12.
Daniels, David N., Marshall F. Gilula, and Frank M. Ochberg, eds.
Violence and the Struggle for Existence. Boston: Little, Brown, 1970.
Feshback, Norma D., and Kiki Roe. "Empathy in Six-and Seven-Year-
Olds." Child Development 39 (1968): 133-45.
Galassi, Merna Dee, and John P. Galassi. "Modifying Assertive and
Aggressive Behavior Through Assertion Training." Journal of
College Student Personnel 19 (September 1978): 45356.
Garrison, Stuart R., and Arnold Stolberg. "Modification of Anger in
Children by Affective Imagery Training." Journal of Abnormal Child

Psychology 11 (1983): 115-30.
Green, Robert A., and Edward J. Murray. "Instigation to Aggression
as a Function of Self-disclosure and Threat to Self-esteem." Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology 40 (1973): 440-43.
Hollandsworth, James G. "Differentiating Assertion and Aggression:
Some Behavioral Guidelines." Behavior Therapy 8 (1977): 347-52.
Hornstein, Harvey A. Cruelty and Kindness: A New Look at
Aggression and Altruism. Englewood Cliffs, NJ.: Prentice-Hall, 1976.
Innes, Christopher A. "Drug Use and Crime." Bureau of Justice
Statistics, Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, July 1988.
Jacobson, Edmund. Biology of Emotions. Springfield, [1].: Charles C.
Thomas, 1967.
Kahn, Michael. "The Physiology of Catharsis." Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 3 (1966): 278-86.
Kettlewell, Paul W., and Donald F. Kausch. "The Generalization of
the Effects of a Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment Program for
Aggressive Children." Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 11
(1983): 101-14.
 

Page 104
Lerner, Harriet E. "Internal Prohibitions Against Female Anger."
American Journal of Psychoanalysis 40 (1980): 137-48.
Lerner, Harriet Goldhor. The Dance of Anger. New York: Harper &
Row, 1985.
Marshall, John R. "The Expression of Feelings." Archives of General
Psychiatry 27 (December 1972): 786-90.
Meichenbaum, Donald H., and Joseph Goodman. "Training Impulsive
Children to Talk to Themselves: A Means of Developing Self-
control." Journal of Abnormal Psychology 77 (1971): 115-26.
Novaco, Raymond W. "The Functions and Regulation of the Arousal
of Anger." American Journal of Psychiatry 133 (October 1976): 1124-
27.
. "Stress Inoculation: A Cognitive Therapy for Anger and Its
Application to a Case of Depression." Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology 45 (1977): 600-608.
Pankratz, Loren, Philip Levendusky, and Vincent Glaudin. "The
Antecedents of Anger in a Sample of College Students." Journal of
Psychology 92 (March 1976): 173-78.
Rimm, David C., et al. "Group-assertive Training in Treatment of
Expression of Inappropriate Anger." Psychological Reports 34
(1974): 791-98.
Rohsenow, Damaris J., and Ronald E. Smith. "Irrational Beliefs as
Predictors of Negative Affective States." Motivation and Emotion 6
(1982): 299-314.
Rothenberg, Albert. "On Anger." American Journal of Psychiatry 128
(October 1971): 454-60.
Straus, Murray. "Leveling, Civility, and Violence in the Family."

Journal of Marriage and the Family 36 (February 1974): 13-29.
Tavris, Carol. Anger: The Misunderstood Emotion. New York: Simon
& Schuster, 1982.
 
