DAVID D BURNS, MLD

REVISED AND uppatep-—___
MORE THAN THREE MILLION COPIES IN PRINT

NOW WITH THE ALL-NEW CONSUMER'S GUIDE TO
ANTIDEPRESSANT DRUGS AND A NEW INTRODUCTION
FROM THE AUTHOR

ETUNG
QOD

THe New
MOOD THERAPY

The Clinically Proven Drug-free Treatment for Depression


HEALTH

FEELING GOOD
FEELS WONDERFUL

The good news is that anxiety, guilt, pessimism, procrastination, low
self-esteem, and other “black holes” of depression can be cured
without drugs. In FEELING GOOD, eminent psychiatrist David D.

Burns, M.D., outlines the remarkable, scientifically proven
techniques that will immediately lift your spirits and
help you develop a positive outlook on life:

* Recognize what causes your mood swings
* Nip negative feelings in the bud
* Deal with guilt
* Handle hostility and criticism
* Overcome addiction to love and approval
* Beat “do-nothingism”
* Avoid the painful downward spiral of depression
° Build self-esteem
* Feel good every day

BEGIN NOW, TO EXPERIENCE THE JOY OF

FEELING GOOD
{\(||

“A BOOK TO READ AND RE-READ!”—Los Angeles Times
51500>
Ae |
Quill 9 731763

. . 780380 | |
An Imprint of HarperCollinsPsblishers a
www.harpercollins.com USA $15.00 Canada $23.00

ISBN 0-380-73176-2

2
<x
Ww

LA

o
a
+.
°



Feeling Good: The New Mood Therapy has
sold more than 3 million copies worldwide to date.
In a recent national survey, Feeling Good was
rated as the most helpful book on depression—
from a list of over 1,000 self-help books—and was
the most frequently recommended book for de-
pressed individuals by American mental health
professionals. Dr. Burns’ Feeling Good Handbook
was rated #2 in the same survey. Although self-
help books are quite controversial, five controlled
outcome studies published in scientific journals
over the past decade indicated that 70 percent of
depressed individuals who read Feeling Good
improved within four weeks even though they re-
ceived no other treatment. In addition, these pa-
tients have maintained their improvement during
follow-up periods of up to three years. Surpris-
ingly, the antidepressant effects of Feeling Good
appear to be as strong as antidepressant medica-
tions or individual psychotherapy for patients
suffering from episodes of major depression!
Although Dr. Burns does not recommend any self-
help book as a substitute for professional therapy,
Feeling Good should prove immensely illu-
minating to anyone suffering from depression or
anxiety.

Feeling Good Feels Wonderful!
You Owe It to Yourself to Feel Good!

‘*T would personally evaluate David Burns’
Feeling Good as one of the most significant
books to come out of the last third of the
Twentieth Century.’

Dr. David F. Maas, Professor of English,
Ambassador University

Also by David D. Burns, M.D.

THE FEELING GOOD HANDBOOK
INTIMATE CONNECTIONS

TEN DAYS TO SELF ESTEEM
THE LEADER’S MANUAL

TEELING
(00D

THe New
[MOOD THERAPY

DAVID D. BURNS, M.D

VA

Quill
of HarperCollinsPublishers

The ideas, procedures, and suggestions contained in this book are not intended as a
substitute for consulting with your physician. All matters regarding your health require
medical supervision.

A hardcover edition of this book was published in 1980 by
William Morrow and Company, Inc.

FEELING GOOD. Copyright © 1980 by David Burns. All rights reserved. Printed in the
United States of America. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner
whatsoever without written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied
in critical articles and reviews. For information address HarperCollins Publishers Inc., 10
East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022.

HarperCollins books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional
use. For information please write: Special Markets Department, HarperCollins

Publishers Inc., 10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022.

First WholeCare edition published 1999.
Reprinted in Quill 2000.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available.
ISBN 0-380-73176-2

09 08 07 06 RRD 30 29 28 27

This book is dedicated to Aaron T. Beck, M.D., in
admiration of his knowledge and courage and in ap-
preciation of his patience, dedication and empathy.


Acknowledgments

I am grateful to my wife, Melanie, for her editorial assis-
tance and patience and encouragement on the many long
evenings and weekends that were spent in the preparation
of this book. I would also like to thank Mary Lovell for
her enthusiasm and for her technical assistance in typing
the manuscript.

The development of cognitive therapy has been a team
effort involving many talented individuals. In the 1930s,
Dr. Abraham Lowe, a physician, began a free-of-charge
self-help movement for individuals with emotional diffi-
culties, called ‘“Recovery Incorporated,’’ which is still in
existence today. Dr. Lowe was one of the first health pro-
fessionals to emphasize the important role of our thoughts
and attitudes on our feelings and behavior. Although many
people are not aware of his work, Dr. Lowe deserves a great
deal of credit for pioneering many of the ideas that are still
in vogue today.

In the 1950s, the noted New York psychologist, Dr. Al-
bert Ellis, refined these concepts and created a new form
of psychotherapy called Rational Emotive Therapy. Dr. EI-
lis published over fifty books that emphasize the role of
negative self-talk (such as ‘‘shoulds’’ and ‘‘oughts’’) and
irrational beliefs (such as ‘‘I must be perfect’’) in a wide

Vii

viii Acknowledgments

variety of emotional problems. Like Dr. Lowe, his brilliant
contributions are sometimes not sufficiently acknowledged
by academic researchers and scholars. In fact, when I wrote
the first edition of Feeling Good, I was not especially fa-
miliar with the work of Dr. Ellis and did not really appre-
ciate the importance and magnitude of his contributions. I
want to set the record straight here!

Finally, in the 1960s, my colleague at the University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Dr. Aaron Beck, adapted
these ideas and treatment techniques to the problem of clin-
ical depression. He described the depressed patient’s neg-
ative view of the self, the world, and the future, and
proposed a new form of ‘‘thinking therapy’’ for depression,
which he called ‘‘cognitive therapy.’’ The focus of cogni-
tive therapy was helping the depressed patient change these
negative thinking patterns. Dr. Beck’s contributions, like
those of Drs. Lowe and Ellis, have been substantial. His
Beck Depression Inventory, published in 1964, allowed cli-
nicians and researchers to measure depression for the first
time. The idea that we could measure how severe a pa-
tient’s depression was, and track changes in response to
treatment, was revolutionary. Dr. Beck also emphasized the
importance of systematic, quantitative research so we could
get objective information on how well the different kinds
of psychotherapy actually worked, and how effective they
are in comparison to antidepressant drug therapy.

Since the time of those three early pioneers, many hun-
dreds of gifted researchers and clinicians throughout the
world have contributed to this new approach. In fact, there
has probably been more published research on cognitive
therapy than on any other form of psychotherapy ever de-
veloped, with the possible exception of behavior therapy.
Clearly, I cannot mention all the individuals who have
made important contributions to the development of cog-
nitive therapy. In the early days of cognitive therapy, during
the 1970s, I worked with several colleagues at the Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania School of Medicine who helped to
create many of the treatment techniques still in use today.

Acknowledgments ix

They included Drs. John Rush, Maria Kovacs, Brian Shaw,
Gary Emery, Steve Hollon, Rich Bedrosian, Ruth Green-
berg, Ira Herman, Jeff Young, Art Freeman, Ron Coleman,
Jackie Persons, and Robert Leahy.

Several individuals have given me permission to refer to
their work in detail in this book, including Drs. Raymond
Novaco, Arlene Weissman, and Mark K. Goldstein.

I would like to make special mention of Maria Guarnas-
chelli, the editor of this book, for her endless spark and
vitality which have been a special inspiration to me.

During the time I was engaged in the training and re-
search which led to this book, I was a Fellow of the Foun-
dations’ Fund for Research in Psychiatry. I would like to
thank them for their support which made this experience
possible.

And my thanks to Frederick K. Goodwin, M.D., a former
chief at the National Institute of Mental Health, for his val-
uable consultation with regard to the role of biological fac-
tors and antidepressant drugs in treating mood disorders.
Two Stanford colleagues, Drs. Greg Tarasoff and Joe Bel-
lenoff, provided helpful feedback about the new drug chap-
ters.

I would like to thank Arthur P. Schwartz for his encour-
agement and persistence. I would also like to thank Ann
McKay Thoroman at Avon Books for editorial help on the
new psychopharmacology chapters.

Finally, I would like to thank my daughter, Signe Burns,
for extraordinarily helpful suggestions and meticulous ed-
iting of the new material in this 1999 edition.


Preface

I am pleased that David Burns is making available to the
general public an approach to mood modification which has
stimulated much interest and excitement among mental
health professionals. Dr. Burns has condensed years of re-
search conducted at the University of Pennsylvania on the
causes and treatments of depression, and lucidly presents
the essential self-help component of the specialized treat-
ment that has derived from that research. The book is an
important contribution to those who wish to give them-
selves a ‘‘top flight’’ education in understanding and mas-
tering their moods.

A few words about the evolution of cognitive therapy may
interest readers of Feeling Good: The New Mood Therapy.
Soon after I began my professional career as an enthusiastic
student and practitioner of traditional psychoanalytic psychi-
atry, I began to investigate the empirical support for the Freud-
ian theory and therapy of depression. While such support
proved elusive, the data I obtained in my quest suggested a
new, testable theory about the causes of emotional distur-
bances. The research seemed to reveal that the depressed in-
dividual sees himself as a ‘‘loser,’’ as an inadequate person
doomed to frustration, deprivation, humiliation, and failure.
Further experiments showed a marked difference between the

xi

xii Preface

depressed person’s self-evaluation, expectations, the aspira-
tions on the one hand and his actual achievements—often
very striking—on the other. My conclusion was that depres-
sion must involve a disturbance in thinking: the depressed
person thinks in idiosyncratic and negative ways about him-
self, his environment, and his future. The pessimistic mental
set affects his mood, his motivation, and his relationships with
others, and leads to the full spectrum of psychological and
physical symptoms typical of depression.

We now have a large body of research data and clinical
experience which suggests that people can learn to con-
trol painful mood swings and self-defeating behavior
through the application of a few relatively simple prin-
ciples and techniques. The promising results of this in-
vestigation have triggered interest in cognitive theory
among psychiatrists, psychologists, and other mental
health professionals. Many writers have viewed our find-
ings aS a major development in the scientific study of
psychotherapy and personal change. The developing the-
ory of the emotional disorders that underlies this research
has become the subject of intensive investigations at ac-
ademic centers around the world.

Dr. Burns clearly describes this advance in our under-
standing of depression. He presents, in simple language,
innovative and effective methods for altering painful de-
pressed moods and reducing debilitating anxiety. I expect
that readers of this book will be able to apply to their own
problems the principles and techniques evolved in our work
with patients. While those individuals with more severe
emotional disturbances will need the help of a mental health
professional, individuals with more manageable problems
can benefit by using the newly developed ‘‘common sense’’
coping skills which Dr. Burns delineates. Thus Feeling
Good should prove to be an immensely useful step-by-step
guide for people who wish to help themselves.

Finally, this book reflects the unique personal flair of its

Preface xiii

author, whose enthusiasm and creative energy have been
his particular gifts to his patients and to his colleagues.

Aaron T. Beck, M.D.
Professor of Psychiatry,
University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine


Contents

Part I.

Part Il.

au

co N

Part Ill.
9.

Introduction

THEORY AND RESEARCH

A Breakthrough in the Treatment
of Mood Disorders

How to Diagnose Your Moods:
The First Step in the Cure
Understanding Your Moods:

You Feel the Way You Think

PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS

Start by Building Self-Esteem
Do-Nothingism: How to Beat It
Verbal Judo: Learn to Talk Back When
You're Under the Fire of Criticism
Feeling Angry? What's Your IQ?
Ways of Defeating Guilt

“REALISTIC” DEPRESSIONS
Sadness Is Not Depression

xvii

19

28

51
53

131
149
198

229
231

xvi Contents

Part IV.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

Part V.

Part VII.

17.
18.
19.

20.

PREVENTION AND
PERSONAL GROWTH

The Cause of It All

The Approval Addiction

The Love Addiction

Your Work Is Not Your Worth
Dare to Be Average!

Ways to Overcome Perfectionism

DEFEATING HOPELESSNESS
AND SUICIDE

The Ultimate Victory:
Choosing to Live

COPING WITH THE
STRESSES AND STRAINS
OF DAILY LIVING

How | Practice What | Preach

THE CHEMISTRY OF MOOD

The Search for “Black Bile”

The Mind-Body Problem

What You Need to Know about
Commonly Prescribed Anti-
depressants

The Complete Consumer's Guide to
Antidepressant Drug Therapy

Notes and References {Chapters 17 to 20)
Suggested Resources

Index

259

261
290
311
327
352

381

383

407

409

425

427
455

474

513

682
688
693

Introduction
(Revised Edition, 1999)

I have been amazed by the interest in cognitive behavioral
therapy that has developed since Feeling Good was first
published in 1980. At that time, very few people had heard
of cognitive therapy. Since that time, cognitive therapy has
caught on in a big way among mental health professionals
and the general public as well. In fact, cognitive therapy
has become one of the most widely practiced and most
intensely researched forms of psychotherapy in the world.

Why such interest in this particular brand of psychother-
apy? There are at least three reasons. First, the basic ideas
are very down-to-earth and intuitively appealing. Second,
many research studies have confirmed that cognitive ther-
apy can be very helpful for individuals suffering depression
and anxiety and a number of other common problems as
well. In fact, cognitive therapy appears to be at least as
helpful as the best antidepressant medications (such as Pro-
zac). And third, many successful self-help books, including
my own Feeling Good, have created a strong popular de-
mand for cognitive therapy in the United States and
throughout the world as well.

Before I explain some of the exciting new developments,
let me briefly explain what cognitive therapy is. A cogni-

xvii

xviii Introduction

tion is a thought or perception. In other words, your cog-
nitions are the way you are thinking about things at any
moment, including this very moment. These thoughts scroll
across your mind automatically and often have a huge im-
pact on how you feel.

For example, right now you are probably having some
thoughts and feelings about this book. If you picked this
book up because you have been feeling depressed and dis-
couraged, you may be thinking about things in a negative,
self-critical way: ‘‘I’m such a loser. What’s wrong with
me? Ill never get better. A stupid self-help book like this
couldn’t possibly help me. I don’t have any problem with
my thoughts. My problems are real.’’ If you are feeling
angry or annoyed you may be thinking: “‘This guy Burns
is just a con artist and he’s just trying to get rich. He prob-
ably doesn’t even know what he’s talking about.’’ And if
you are feeling optimistic and interested you may be think-
ing: ‘‘Hey, this is interesting. I may learn something really
exciting and helpful.’’ In each case, your thoughts create
your feelings.

This example illustrates the powerful principle at the
heart of cognitive therapy—your feelings result from the
messages you give yourself. In fact, your thoughts often
have much more to do with how you feel than what is
actually happening in your life.

This isn’t a new idea. Nearly two thousand years ago the
Greek philosopher, Epictetus, stated that people are dis-
turbed ‘‘not by things, but by the views we take of them.”’
In the Book of Proverbs (23: 7) in the Old Testament you
can find this passage: ‘‘For as he thinks within himself, so
he is.’ And even Shakespeare expressed a similar idea
when he said: “‘for there is nothing either good or bad, but
thinking makes it so’’ (Hamlet, Act 2, Scene 2).

Although the idea has been around for ages, most de-
pressed people do not really comprehend it. If you feel
depressed, you may think it 1s because of bad things that
have happened to you. You may think you are inferior and
destined to be unhappy because you failed in your work or

Introduction xix

were rejected by someone you loved. You may think your
feelings of inadequacy result from some personal defect—
you may feel convinced you are not smart enough, suc-
cessful enough, attractive enough, or talented enough to feel
happy and fulfilled. You may think your negative feelings
are the result of an unloving or traumatic childhood, or bad
genes you inherited, or a chemical or hormonal imbalance
of some type. Or you may blame others when you get up-
set: ‘It’s these lousy stupid drivers that tick me off when
I drive to work! If it weren’t for these jerks, I’d be having
a perfect day!’’ And nearly all depressed people are con-
vinced that they are facing some special, awful truth about
themselves and the world and that their terrible feelings are
absolutely realistic and inevitable.

Certainly all these ideas contain an important germ of
truth—bad things do happen, and life beats up on most of
us at times. Many people do experience catastrophic losses
and confront devastating personal problems. Our genes,
hormones, and childhood experiences probably do have an
impact on how we think and feel. And other people can be
annoying, cruel, or thoughtless. But all these theories about
the causes of our bad moods have the tendency to make us
victims—because we think the causes result from some-
thing beyond our control. After all, there is little we can do
to change the way people drive at rush hour, or the way
we were treated when we were young, or our genes or body
chemistry (save taking a pill). In contrast, you can learn to
change the way you think about things, and you can also
change your basic values and beliefs. And when you do,
you will often experience profound and lasting changes in
your mood, outlook, and productivity. That, in a nutshell,
is what cognitive therapy is all about.

The theory is straightforward and may even seem overly
simple—but don’t write it off as pop psychology. I think
you will discover that cognitive therapy can be surprisingly
helpful—even if you feel pretty skeptical (as I did) when
you first learn about it. I have personally conducted more
than thirty thousand cognitive therapy sessions with hun-

xx Introduction

dreds of depressed and anxious individuals, and I am al-
ways surprised about how helpful and powerful this method
can be.

The effectiveness of cognitive therapy has been con-
firmed by many outcome studies by researchers throughout
the world during the past two decades. In a recent landmark
article entitled ‘‘Psychotherapy vs. Medication for Depres-
sion: Challenging the Conventional Wisdom with Data,”’
Drs. David O. Antonuccio and William G. Danton from the
University of Nevada and Dr. Gurland Y. DeNelsky from
the Cleveland Clinic reviewed many of the most carefully
conducted studies on depression that have been published
in scientific journals throughout the world.' The studies re-
viewed compared the antidepressant medications with psy-
chotherapy in the treatment of depression and anxiety.
Short-term studies as well as long-term follow-up studies
were included in this review. The authors came to a number
of startling conclusions that are at odds with the conven-
tional wisdom:

¢ Although depression is conventionally viewed as a
medical illness, research studies indicate that genetic
influences appear to account for only about 16 percent
of depression. For many individuals, life influences ap-
pear to be the most important causes.

¢ Drugs are the most common treatment for depression
in the United States, and there is a widespread belief,
popularized by the media, that drugs are the most ef-
fective treatment. However, this opinion is not consis-
tent with the results of many carefully conducted
outcome studies during the past twenty years. These
studies show that the newer forms of psychotherapy,
especially cognitive therapy, can be at least as effective
as drugs, and for many patients appear to be more ef-
fective. This is good news for individuals who prefer
to be treated without medications—due to personal
preferences or health concerns. It is also good news for

; Introduction xxi

the millions of individuals who have not responded ad-
equately to antidepressants after years and years of
treatment and who still struggle with depression and
anxiety.

Following recovery from depression, patients treated
with psychotherapy are more likely to remain unde-
pressed and are significantly less likely to relapse than
patients treated with antidepressants alone. This is es-
pecially important because of the growing awareness
that many people relapse following recovery from de-
pression, especially if they are treated with antidepres-
sant medications alone without any talking therapy.

Based on these findings, Dr. Antonuccio and his coau-
thors concluded that psychotherapy should not be consid-
ered a second-rate treatment but should usually be the
initial treatment for depression. In addition, they empha-
sized that cognitive therapy appears to be one of the most
effective psychotherapies for depression, if not the most
effective.

Of course, medications can be helpful for some individ-
uals—even life-saving. Medications can be combined with
psychotherapy for maximum effect as well, especially when
the depression is severe. It is extremely important to know
that we have powerful new weapons to fight depression,
and that drug-free treatments such as cognitive therapy can
be highly effective.

Recent studies indicate that psychotherapy can be helpful
not only for mild depressions, but also for severe depres-
sions as well. These findings are at odds with the popular
belief that ‘‘talking therapy’’ can only help people with
mild problems, and that if you have a serious depression
you need to be treated with drugs.

Although we are taught that depression may result from
an imbalance in brain chemistry, recent studies indicate that
cognitive behavioral therapy may actually change brain
chemistry. In these studies, Drs. Lewis R. Baxter, Jr., Jef-

xxii Introduction

é@

frey M. Schwartz, Kenneth S. Bergman, and their col-
leagues at UCLA School of Medicine, used positron
emission tomography (PET scanning) to evaluate changes
in brain metabolism in two groups of patients before and
after treatment.* One group received cognitive behavioral
therapy and no drugs, and the other group received an an-
tidepressant medication and no psychotherapy.

As one might expect, there were changes in brain chemis-
try in the patients in the drug therapy group who improved.
These changes indicated that their brain metabolism had
slowed down—in other words, the nerves in a certain region
of the brain appeared to become more ‘‘relaxed.’’ What
came as quite a surprise was there were similar changes in
the brains of the patients successfully treated with cognitive
behavioral therapy. However, these patients received no
medications. Further, there were no significant differences in
the brain changes in the drug therapy and psychotherapy
groups, or in the effectiveness of the two treatments. Because
of these and other similar studies, investigators are starting
for the first time to entertain the possibility that cognitive
behavior therapy—the methods described in this book—
may actually help people by changing the chemistry and
architecture of the human brain!

Although no one treatment will ever be a panacea, re-
search studies indicate that cognitive therapy can be helpful
for a variety of disorders in addition to depression. For
example, in several studies patients with panic attacks have
responded so well to cognitive therapy without any medi-
cations that many experts now consider cognitive therapy
alone to be the best treatment for this disorder. Cognitive
therapy can also be helpful in many other forms of anxiety
(such as chronic worrying, phobias, obsessive-compulsive
disorder, and post-traumatic stress disorder), and is also be-
ing used with some success in the personality disorders,
such as borderline personality disorder.

Cognitive therapy is gaining popularity in the treatment
of many other disorders as well. At the 1998 Stanford Psy-
chopharmacology Conference, I was intrigued by the pres-
entation by a colleague from Stanford, Dr. Stuart Agras. Dr.

Introduction xxiii

Agras is a renowned expert in eating disorders such as binge
eating, anorexia nervosa, and bulimia. He presented the
results of numerous recent studies on the treatment of eating
disorders with antidepressant medications versus psychother-
apy. These studies indicated that cognitive behavior therapy is
the most effective treatment for eating disorders—better than
any known drug or any other form of psychotherapy.”

We are also beginning to learn more about how cognitive
therapy works. One important discovery is that self-help
seems to be a key to recovery whether or not you receive
treatment. In a series of five remarkable studies published
in the prestigious Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psy-
chology and in The Gerontologist, Dr. Forest Scogin and
his colleagues at the University of Alabama studied the ef-
fects of simply reading a good self-help book like Feeling
Good—without any other therapy. The name of this new
type of treatment is ‘‘bibliotherapy’’ (reading therapy).
They discovered that Feeling Good bibliotherapy may be
as effective as a full course of psychotherapy or treatment
with the best antidepressant drugs.*-’ Given the tremendous
pressures to cut health care costs, this is of considerable
interest, since a paperback copy of the Feeling Good book
costs less than two Prozac pills—and is presumably free of
any troublesome side effects!

In a recent study, Dr. Scogin and his colleague, Dr.
Christine Jamison, randomly assigned eighty individuals
seeking treatment for a major depressive episode to one of
two groups. The researchers gave the patients in the first
group a copy of my Feeling Good and encouraged them to
read it within four weeks. This group was called the Im-
mediate Bibliotherapy Group. These patients also received
a booklet containing blank copies of the self-help forms in
the book in case they decided to do some of the suggested
exercises in the book.

“No current treatment is a panacea, including cognitive therapy. Another new short-
term therapy, called interpersonal therapy, has also shown some promise for patients
with eating disorders. In the future, studies like those conducted by Dr. Agras and
his colleagues will undoubtedly lead to more powerful and specific treatments for
eating disorders.

xxiv. Introduction

Patients in the second group were told they would be
placed on a four-week waiting list before beginning treat-
ment. This group was called the Delayed Bibliotherapy
Group because these patients were not given a copy of
Feeling Good until the second four weeks of the study. The
patients in the Delayed Bibliotherapy Group served as a
control group to make sure that any improvement in the
Immediate Bibliotherapy was not just due to the passage of
time.

At the initial evaluation, the researchers administered two
depression tests to all the patients. One was the Beck De-
pression Inventory (BDI), a time-honored self-assessment
test that patients fill out on their own, and the second was
the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HRSD), which
is administered by trained depression researchers. As you
can see in Figure 1, there was no difference in the depres-
sion levels in the two groups at the initial evaluation. You
can also see that the average scores for the patients in the
Immediate Bibliotherapy Group and the Delayed Biblioth-
erapy group at the initial evaluation were both around 20
or above on the BDI and on the HRSD. These scores in-
dicate that the depression levels in both groups were similar
to the depression levels in most published studies of anti-
depressants or psychotherapy. In fact, the BDI score was
nearly identical to the average BDI scores of approximately
five hundred patients seeking treatment at my clinic in Phil-
adelphia during the late 1980s.

Every week a research assistant called the patients in
both groups and administered the BDI by telephone. The
assistant also answered any questions patients had about the
study and encouraged the patients in the Immediate Bib-
liotherapy Group to try to complete the book within four
weeks. These calls were limited to ten minutes and no
counseling was offered.

At the end of the four weeks, the two groups were com-
pared. You can see in Figure 1 that the patients in the Im-
mediate Bibliotherapy Group improved considerably. In
fact, the average scores on both the BDI and HRSD were
around 10 or below, scores in the range considered normal.

Severe

Moderate

Mild

Normal

Happy

Severe

Moderate

Mild

Normal

Happy

Introduction xxv

Immediate Bibliotherapy Group

Intake 4 Weeks 3 Months

Delayed Bibliotherapy Group

25

20

15

10

Intake 4 Weeks 3 Months
BDI Mm HRSD

Figure 1. The patients in the Immediate Bibliotherapy Group (top chart)
received Feeling Good at the intake evaluation. The patients in the
Delayed Bibliotherapy Group (bottom chart) received Feeling Good at the
four-week evaluation. BDl=Beck Depression Inventory. HRSD=Hamilton
Rating Scale for Depression.

These changes in depression were very significant. You can
also see that the patients maintained their gains at the three-
month evaluation and did not relapse. In fact, there was a
tendency for continued improvement following the com-
pletion of the bibliotherapy treatment; the scores on both
depression tests were actually lower at the three-month

evaluation.

xxvi Introduction

In contrast, you can see in Figure 1 that the patients in
the Delayed Bibliotherapy Group barely changed and were
still around 20 at the four-week evaluation. This showed
that the improvement from Feeling Good was not just due
to the passage of time. Then Drs. Jamison and Scogin gave
the patients in the Delayed Bibliotherapy Group a copy of
Feeling Good and asked them to read it during the second
four weeks of the study. Their improvement in the next
four weeks was similar to the improvement in the Imme-
diate Bibliotherapy Group during the first four weeks of the
study. You can also see in Figure 1 that the patients in both
groups did not relapse but maintained their gains at the
three-month evaluation.

The results of this study indicated that Feeling Good ap-
peared to have substantial antidepressant effects. At the end
of the first four-week Bibliotherapy period, 70 percent of
the patients in the Immediate Bibliotherapy Group no
longer met the criteria for a major depressive episode, ac-
cording to the diagnostic criteria for a major depressive
episode that are outlined in the American Psychiatric As-
sociation’s official Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
(DSM). In fact, the improvement was so great most of these
patients did not need any further treatment at the medical
center. To the best of my knowledge, these are the first
published scientific studies showing that a self-help book
can actually have significant antidepressant effects in pa-
tients suffering from episodes of major depression.

In contrast, only 3 percent of the patients in the Delayed
Bibliotherapy Group recovered during the first four weeks.
In other words, the patients who did not read Feeling Good
failed to improve. However, at the three-month evaluation,
when both groups had read Feeling Good, 75 percent of
the patients in the Immediate Bibliotherapy Group and 73
percent of the patients in the Delayed Bibliotherapy Group
no longer qualified for a diagnosis of major depressive ep-
isode according to DSM criteria.

The researchers compared the magnitude of the improve-
ment in these groups with the amount of improvement in

Introduction xxvii

published outcome studies using antidepressant medications
or psychotherapy or both. In the large National Institute of
Mental Health Collaborative Depression study, there was
an average reduction of 11.6 points on the HRSD in pa-
tients who received cognitive therapy from highly trained
therapists for twelve weeks. This was very similar to the
10.6-point change in the HRSD observed in the patients
who read Feeling Good after just four weeks. However, the
bibliotherapy treatment seemed to work significantly faster.
My own clinical experience confirms this. In my private
practice, very few patients have recovered during the first
four weeks of treatment.

The percentage of patients who dropped out of the bib-
liotherapy therapy was also very small, around 10 percent.
This is less than most published outcome studies using
drugs or psychotherapy, which typically have dropout rates
from 15 percent to over 50 percent. Finally, the patients
developed significantly more positive attitudes and thinking
patterns after reading Feeling Good. This was consistent
with the premise of the book; namely, that you can defeat
depression by changing the negative thinking patterns that
cause it.

The researchers concluded that the bibliotherapy was ef-
fective for patients suffering from depression and might
also have a significant role in public education and in de-
pression prevention programs. They speculated that Feeling
Good bibliotherapy might help prevent serious episodes of
depression among individuals with a tendency toward neg-
ative thinking.

Finally, the researchers addressed another important con-
cern: would the antidepressant effects of Feeling Good last?
Skillful motivational speakers can get a crowd of people
excited and optimistic for brief periods of time—but these
brief mood-elevating effects often don’t last. The same
problem holds for the treatment of depression. Following
successful treatment with drugs or psychotherapy, many pa-
tients feel tremendously improved—only to relapse back
into depression after a period of time. These relapses can
be devastating because patients feel so demoralized.

Xxvill Introduction

In 1997, the investigators reported the results of a three-
year follow-up of the patients in the study I’ve just de-
scribed.’ The authors were Drs. Nancy Smith, Mark Floyd,
and Forest Scogin from the University of Alabama and Dr.
Christine Jamison from the Tuskegee Veterans Affairs
Medical Center. The researchers contacted the patients
three years after reading Feeling Good and administered
the depression tests once again. They also asked the patients
several questions about how they had been doing since the
completion of the study. The researchers learned that the
patients did not relapse but maintained their gains during
this three-year period. In fact, the scores on the two de-
pression tests at the three-year evaluation were actually
slightly better than the scores at the completion of the bib-
liotherapy treatment. More than half of the patients said that
their moods continued to improve following the completion
of the initial study.

The diagnostic findings at the three-year evaluation con-
firmed this—72 percent of the patients still did not meet
the criteria for a major depressive episode, and 70 percent
did not seek or receive any further treatment with medi-
cations or psychotherapy during the follow-up period. Al-
though they experienced the normal ups and downs we all
feel from time to time, approximately half indicated that
when they were upset, they opened up Feeling Good and
reread the most helpful sections. The researchers speculated
that these self-administered ‘‘booster sessions’’ may have
been important in maintaining a positive outlook following
recovery. Forty percent of the patients said that the best
part of the book was that it helped them change their neg-
ative thinking patterns, such as learning to be less perfec-
tionistic and to give up all-or-nothing thinking.

Of course, this study had limitations, like all studies. For
one thing, not every patient was “‘cured’’ by reading Feel-
ing Good. No treatment is a panacea. While it is encour-
aging that many patients seem to respond to reading
Feeling Good, it is also clear that some patients with more
severe or chronic depressions will need the help of a ther-

Introduction xxix

apist and possibly an antidepressant medication as well.
This is nothing to be ashamed of. Different individuals re-
spond better to different approaches. It is good that we now
have three types of effective treatment for depression: an-
tidepressant medications, individual and group psychother-
apy, and bibliotherapy.

Remember that you can use the cognitive bibliotherapy
between therapy sessions to speed your recovery even if
you are in treatment. In fact, when I first wrote Feeling
Good, this is how I imagined the book would be used. I
intended it to be a tool my patients could use between ther-
apy sessions to speed up the treatment and never dreamed
that it might someday be used alone as a treatment for de-
pression.

It appears that more and more therapists are beginning
to assign bibliotherapy to their patients as psychotherapy
‘*homework’’ between therapy sessions. In 1994, the re-
sults of a nationwide survey about the use of bibliotherapy
by mental health professionals were published in the Au-
thoritative Guide to Self-Help Books (published by Guilford
Press, New York). Drs. John W. Santrock and Ann M. Min-
net from the University of Texas in Dallas and Barbara D.
Campbell, a research associate at the university, conducted
this study. These three researchers surveyed five hundred
American mental health professionals from all fifty states
and asked whether they ‘‘prescribed’’ books for patients to
read between sessions to speed recovery. Seventy percent
of the therapists polled indicated that they had recom-
mended at least three self-help books to their patients dur-
ing the previous year, and 86 percent reported that these
books provided a positive benefit to their patients. The ther-
apists were also asked which self-help books, from a list
of one thousand, they most frequently recommended for
their patients. Feeling Good was the number-one-rated
book for depressed patients, and my Feeling Good Hand-
book (published as a Plume paperback in 1989) was rated
number two.

I was not aware this survey was being conducted, and
was thrilled to learn about the results of it. One of my goals

Xxx Introduction

when I wrote Feeling Good was to provide reading for my
own patients to speed their learning and recovery between
therapy sessions, but I never dreamed this idea would catch
on in such a big way!

Should you expect to improve or recover after reading
Feeling Good? That would be unreasonable. The research
clearly indicates that while many people who read Feeling
Good improved, others needed the additional help of a
mental health professional. I have received many letters
(probably more than ten thousand) from people who read
Feeling Good. Many of them kindly described in glowing
terms how Feeling Good had helped them, often after years
and years of unsuccessful treatment with medications and
even electroconvulsive therapy. Others indicated that they
found the ideas in Feeling Good appealing but needed a
referral to a good local therapist to make these ideas work
for them. This is understandable—we are all different, and
it would be unrealistic to think that any one book or form
of therapy would be the answer for everyone.

Depression is one of the worst forms of suffering, be-
cause of the immense feelings of shame, worthlessness,
hopelessness, and demoralization. Depression can seem
worse than terminal cancer, because most cancer patients
feel loved and they have hope and self-esteem. Many de-
pressed patients have told me, in fact, that they yearned for
death and prayed every night that they would get cancer,
so they could die in dignity without having to commit su-
icide.

But no matter how terrible your depression and anxiety
may feel, the prognosis for recovery is excellent. You may
be convinced that your own case is so bad, so over-
whelming and hopeless, that you are the one person who
will never get well, no matter what. But sooner or later, the
clouds have a way of blowing away and the sky suddenly
clears and the sun begins to shine again. When this hap-
pens, the feelings of relief and joy can be overwhelming.
And if you are now struggling with depression and low
self-esteem, I believe this transformation can happen for

Introduction xXxx!I

you as well, no matter how discouraged or depressed you
may feel.

Well, it’s time to get on to Chapter 1 so we can start to

work together. I want to wish you the very best as you read
it, and hope you find these ideas and methods helpful!

David D. Burns, M.D.

Clinical Associate Professor of Psychiatry
and Behavioral Sciences,

Stanford University School of Medicine

References

I.

Antonuccio, D. O., Danton, W. G., & DeNelsky, G. Y.
(1995). Psychotherapy versus medication for depression:
Challenging the conventional wisdom with data. Profes-
sional Psychology: Research and Practice, 26(6), 574—
585.

. Baxter, L. R., Schwartz, J. M., & Bergman, K. S., et al.

(1992). Caudate glucose metabolic rate changes with
both drug and behavioral therapy for obsessive-
compulsive disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry,
49, 681-689.

. Scogin, F., Jamison, C., & Gochneaut, K. (1989). The

comparative efficacy of cognitive and behavioral bib-
liotherapy for mildly and moderately depressed older
adults. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
57, 403-407.

. Scogin, F., Hamblin, D., & Beutler, L. (1987). Biblio-

therapy for depressed older adults: A self-help alterna-
tive. The Gerontologist, 27, 383-387.

. Scogin, F., Jamison, C., & Davis, N. (1990). A two-year

follow-up of the effects of bibliotherapy for depressed

xXxxii Introduction

older adults. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psy-
chology, 58, 665-667.

6. Jamison, C., & Scogin, F. (1995). Outcome of cognitive
bibliotherapy with depressed adults. Journal of Con-
sulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 644-650.

7. Smith, N. M., Floyd, M.R., Jamison, C., & Scogin, F.
(1997). Three-year follow-up of bibliotherapy for de-
pression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 65(2), 324-327.

Part |

Theory and Research


Chapter |

A Breakthrough in the
Treatment of Mood Disorders

Depression has been called the world’s number one public
health problem. In fact, depression 1s so widespread it is
considered the common cold of psychiatric disturbances.
But there is a grim difference between depression and a
cold. Depression can kill you. The suicide rate, studies
indicate, has been on a shocking increase in recent years,
even among children and adolescents. This escalating death
rate has occurred in spite of the billions of antidepressant
drugs and tranquilizers that have been dispensed during the
past several decades.

This might sound fairly gloomy. Before you get even
more depressed, let me tell you the good news. Depression
is an illness and not a necessary part of healthy living.
What’s more important—you can overcome it by learning
some simple methods for mood elevation. A group of psy-
chiatrists and psychologists at the University of Pennsy]l-
vania School of Medicine has reported a significant
breakthrough in the treatment and prevention of mood dis-
orders. Dissatisfied with traditional methods for treating
depression because they found them to be slow and inef-
fective, these doctors developed and systematically tested

9

10 David D. Burns, M.D.

an entirely new and remarkably successful approach to de-
pression and other emotional disorders. A series of recent
studies confirms that these techniques reduce the symptoms
of depression much more rapidly than conventional psy-
chotherapy or drug therapy. The name of this revolutionary
treatment is ‘‘cognitive therapy.’’

I have been centrally involved in the development of
cognitive therapy, and this book 1s the first to describe these
methods to the general public. The systematic application
and scientific evaluation of this approach in treating clinical
depression traces its origins to the innovative work of Drs.
Albert Ellis and Aaron T. Beck, who began to refine their
unique approach to mood transformation in the mid-1950’s
and early 1960’s.* Their pioneering efforts began to emerge
into prominence in the past decade because of the research
that many mental-health professionals have undertaken to
refine and evaluate cognitive therapy methods at academic
institutions in the United States and abroad.

Cognitive therapy is a fast-acting technology of mood
modification that you can learn to apply on your own. It
can help you eliminate the symptoms and experience per-
sonal growth so you can minimize future upsets and cope
with depression more effectively in the future.

The simple, effective mood-control techniques of cog-
nitive therapy provide:

1. Rapid Symptomatic Improvement: In milder depres-
sions, relief from your symptoms can often be ob-
served in as short a time as twelve weeks.

*The idea that your thinking patterns can profoundly influence your moods
has been described by a number of philosophers in the past 2500 years.
More recently, the cognitive view of emotional disturbances has been
explored in the writings of many psychiatrists and psychologists including
Alfred Adler, Albert Ellis, Karen Horney, and Arnold Lazarus, to name
just a few. A history of this movement has been described in Ellis, A.,
Reason and Emotion in Psychotherapy. New York: Lyle Stuart, 1962.

FEELING GOOD 11

2. Understanding: A clear explanation of why you get
moody and what you can do to change your moods.
You will learn what causes your powerful feelings;
how to distinguish ‘‘normal’’ from ‘‘abnormal’’ emo-
tions; and how to diagnose and assess the severity of
your upsets.

3. Self-control: You will learn how to apply safe and
effective coping strategies that will make you feel bet-
ter whenever you are upset. I will guide you as you
develop a practical, realistic, step-by-step self-help
plan. As you apply it, your moods can come under
greater voluntary control.

4. Prevention and Personal Growth: Genuine and long-
lasting prophylaxis (prevention) of future mood
swings can effectively be based on a reassessment of
some basic values and attitudes which lie at the core
of your tendency toward painful depressions. I will
show you how to challenge and reevaluate certain as-
sumptions about the basis for human worth.

The problem-solving and coping techniques you learn
will encompass every crisis in modern life, from minor ir-
ritations to major emotional collapse. These will include
realistic problems, such as divorce, death, or failure, as well
as those vague, chronic problems that seem to have no ob-
vious external cause, such as low self-confidence, frustra-
tion, guilt, or apathy.

The question may now occur to you, ‘‘Is this just another
self-help pop psychology?’’ Actually, cognitive therapy is
one of the first forms of psychotherapy which has been
shown to be effective through rigorous scientific research
under the critical scrutiny of the academic community. This
therapy is unique in having professional evaluation and val-
idation at the highest academic levels. It is not just another
self-help fad but a major development that has become an
important part of the mainstream of modern psychiatric re-
search and practice. Cognitive therapy’s academic foun-

12 David D. Burns, M.D.

dation has enhanced its impact and should give it staying
power for years to come. But don’t be turned off by the
professional status that cognitive therapy has acquired. Un-
like much traditional psychotherapy, it is not occult and
anti-intuitive. It is practical and based on common sense,
and you can make it work for you.

The first principle of cognitive therapy is that all your
moods are created by your “‘cognitions,’’ or thoughts. A
cognition refers to the way you look at things—your per-
ceptions, mental attitudes, and beliefs. It includes the way
you interpret things—what you say about something or
someone to yourself. You feel the way you do right now
because of the thoughts you are thinking at this moment.

Let me illustrate this. How have you been feeling as you
read this? You might have been thinking, ‘‘Cognitive ther-
apy sounds too good to be true. It would never work for
me.’’ If your thoughts run along these lines, you are feeling
skeptical or even discouraged. What causes you: to feel that
way? Your thoughts. You create those feelings by the dia-
logue you are having with yourself about this book!

Conversely, you may have felt a sudden uplift in mood
because you thought, ‘‘Hey, this sounds like something
which might finally help me.’’ Your emotional reaction is
generated not by the sentences you are reading but by the
way you are thinking. The moment you have a certain
thought and believe it, you will experience an immediate
emotional response. Your thought actually creates the emo-
tion.

The second principle 1s that when you are feeling de-
pressed, your thoughts are dominated by a pervasive negativ-
ity. You perceive not only yourself but the entire world in
dark, gloomy terms. What is even worse—you ‘ll come to be-
lieve things really are as bad as you imagine them to be.

If you are substantially depressed, you will even begin
to believe that things always have been and always will be
negative. As you look into your past, you remember all the
bad things that have happened to you. As you try to imagine
the future, you see only emptiness or unending problems

FEELING GOOD 13

and anguish. This bleak vision creates a sense of hopeless-
ness. This feeling is absolutely illogical, but it seems so
real that you have convinced yourself that your inadequacy
will go on forever.

The third principle is of substantial philosophical and
therapeutic importance. Our research has documented that
the negative thoughts which cause your emotional turmoil
nearly always contain gross distortions. Although these
thoughts appear valid, you will learn that they are irrational
or just plain wrong, and that twisted thinking is a major
cause of your suffering.

The implications are important. Your depression is prob-
ably not based on accurate perceptions of reality but is often
the product of mental slippage.

Suppose you believe that what I’ve said has validity. What
good will it do you? Now we come to the most important
result of our clinical research. You can learn to deal with
your moods more effectively if you master methods that
will help you pinpoint and eliminate the mental distortions
which cause you to feel upset. As you begin to think more
objectively, you will begin to feel better.

How effective is cognitive therapy compared with other
established and accepted methods for treating depression?
Can the new therapy enable severely depressed individuals
to get better without drugs? How rapidly does cognitive
therapy work? Do the results last?

Several years ago a group of investigators at the Center
for Cognitive Therapy at the University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine including Drs. John Rush, Aaron Beck,
Maria Kovacs and Steve Hollon began a pilot study com-
paring cognitive therapy with one of the most widely used
and effective antidepressant drugs on the market, Tofranil
(imipramine hydrochloride). Over forty severely depressed
patients were randomly assigned to two groups. One group
was to receive individual cognitive therapy sessions and no
drugs, while the other group would be treated with Tofranil
and no therapy. This either-or research design was chosen
because it provided the maximum opportunity to see how

14 David D. Burns, M.D.

the treatments compared. Up to that time, no form of psy-
chotherapy had been shown to be as effective for depres-
sion as treatment with an antidepressant drug. This is why
antidepressants have experienced such a wave of interest
from the media, and have come to be regarded by the pro-
fessional community in the past two decades as the best
treatment for most serious forms of depression.

Both groups of patients were treated for a twelve-week
period. All patients were systematically evaluated with ex-
tensive psychological testing prior to therapy, as well as at
several monthly intervals for one year after completion of
treatment. The doctors who performed the psychological
tests were not the therapists who administered the treat-
ment. This ensured an objective assessment of the merits
of each form of treatment.

The patients were suffering from moderate to severe de-
pressive episodes. The majority had failed to improve in
spite of previous treatment with two or more therapists at
other clinics. Three quarters were suicidal at the time of
their referral. The average patient had been troubled by
chronic or intermittent depression for eight years. Many
were absolutely convinced their problems were insoluble,
and felt their lives were hopeless. Your own mood prob-
lems may not seem as overwhelming as theirs. A tough
patient population was chosen so that the treatment could
be tested under the most difficult, challenging conditions.

The outcome of the study was quite unexpected and en-
couraging. The cognitive therapy was at least as effective
as, if not more effective than, the antidepressant drug ther-
apy. As you can see (Table 1~1, page 15), fifteen of the
nineteen patients treated with cognitive therapy had shown
a substantial reduction of symptoms after twelve weeks of
active treatment.* An additional two individuals had im-

*Table 1-1 was adapted from Rush, A. J., Beck, A. T., Kovacs, M., and
Hollon, S. ‘‘Comparative Efficacy of Cognitive Therapy and Pharmacoth-
erapy in the Treatment of Depressed Outpatients.’’ Cognitive Therapy and
Research, Vol. 1, No. I, March 1977, pp. 17-38.

FEELING GOOD 15

Table 1-1. Status of 44 Severely Depressed Patients,
12 Weeks After Beginning Treatment

Patients
Treated with
Antidepressant

Number Who Entered
Treatment

Number who had recovered
completely*

Number who were considerably
improved but still
experienced borderline to
mild depression

Number who were not
substantially improved

Number who dropped out of
treatment

*The superior improvement of the patients treated with cognitive therapy was
statistically significant

proved, but were still experiencing borderline to mild de-
pression. Only one patient had dropped out of treatment,
and one had not yet begun to improve at the end of this
period. In contrast, only five of the twenty-five patients as-
signed to antidepressant drug therapy had shown complete
recovery by the end of the twelve-week period. Eight of
these patients dropped out of therapy as a result of the
adverse side effects of the medication, and twelve others
showed no improvement or only partial improvement.

Of particular importance was the discovery that many
patients treated with cognitive therapy improved more rap-
idly than those successfully treated with drugs. Within the
first week or two, there was a pronounced reduction in
suicidal thoughts among the cognitive therapy group. The
effectiveness of cognitive therapy should be encouraging

16 David D. Burns, M.D.

for individuals who prefer not to rely on drugs to raise their
spirits, but prefer to develop an understanding of what is
troubling them and do something to cope with it.

How about those patients who had not recovered by the
end of twelve weeks? Like any form of treatment, this one
is not a panacea. Clinical experience has shown that all
individuals do not respond as rapidly, but most can never-
theless improve if they persist for a longer period of time.
Sometimes this is hard work! One particularly encouraging
development for individuals with refractory severe depres-
sions is a recent study by Drs. Ivy Blackburn and her as-
sociates at the Medical Research Council at the University
of Edinburgh in Scotland.* These investigators have shown
that the combination of antidepressant drugs with cognitive
therapy can be more effective than either modality above.
In my experience the most crucial predictor of recovery is
a persistent willingness to exert some effort to help yourself.
Given this attitude, you will succeed.

Just how much improvement can you hope for? The av-
erage cognitively treated patient experienced a substantial
elimination of symptoms by the end of treatment. Many
reported they felt the happiest they had ever felt in their
lives. They emphasized that the mood-training brought
about a sense of self-esteem and confidence. No matter how
miserable, depressed, and pessimistic you now feel, I am
convinced that you can experience beneficial effects if you
are willing to apply the methods described in this book with
persistence and consistency.

How long do the effects last? The findings from follow-
up studies during the year after completion of treatment are
quite interesting. While many individuals from both groups
had occasional mood swings at various times during the

*Blackbum, I. M., Bishop, S., Glen, A. I. M., Whalley, L. J. and Christie,
J. E. ‘‘The Efficacy of Cognitive Therapy in Depression. A Treatment
Trial Using Cognitive Therapy and Pharmacotherapy, Each Alone and in
Combination.’’ British Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 139, January 1981,
pp. 181-189.

FEELING GOOD = 17

year, both groups continued on the whole to maintain the
gains they had demonstrated by the end of twelve weeks
of active treatment.

Which group actually fared better during the follow-up
period? The psychological tests, as well as the patients’
own reports, confirmed that the cognitive therapy group
continued to feel substantially better, and these differences
were Statistically significant. The telapse rate over the
course of the year in the cognitive therapy group was less
than half that observed in the drug patients. These were
sizable differences that favored the patients treated with the
new approach.

Does this mean that I can guarantee you will never again
have the blues after using cognitive methods to eliminate
your current depression? Obviously not. That would be like
saying that once you have achieved good physical condition
through daily jogging, you will never again be short of
breath. Part of being human means getting upset from time
to time, so I can guarantee you will not achieve a state of
never-ending bliss! This means you will have to reapply
the techniques that help you if you want to continue to
master your moods. There’s a difference between feeling
better—which can occur spontaneously—and getting bet-
ter—which results from systematically applying and
reapplying the methods that will lift your mood whenever
the need arises.

How has this work been received by the academic com-
munity? The impact of these findings on psychiatrists, psy-
chologists, and other mental-health professionals has been
substantial. It has now been twenty years since this chapter
was first written. During that time, numerous well-
controlled studies of the effectiveness of cognitive therapy
have been published in scientific journals. These studies
have compared the effectiveness of cognitive therapy with
the effectiveness of antidepressant medications as well as
other forms of psychotherapy in the treatment of depres-
sion, anxiety, and other disorders. The results of these stud-
ies have been quite encouraging. Researchers have

18 David D. Burns, M.D.

confirmed our early impressions that cognitive therapy was
at least as effective as medications, and often more effec-
tive, both in the short term and in the long term.

What does this all add up to? We are experiencing a
crucial development in modern psychiatry and psychology—
a promising new approach to understanding human emo-
tions based on a cogent testable therapy. Large numbers of
mental-health professionals are now showing a great inter-
est in this approach, and the ground swell seems to be just
beginning.

Since the first edition of Feeling Good in 1980, many
thousands of depressed individuals have been successfully
treated with cognitive therapy. Some had considered them-
selves hopelessly untreatable and came to us as a last-ditch
effort before commmitting suicide. Many others were
simply troubled by the nagging tensions of daily living and
wanted a greater share of personal happiness. This book is
a carefully thought-out practical application of our work,
and it is designed for you. Good luck!

Chapter 2

How to Diagnose Your Moods:
The First Step in the Cure

Perhaps you are wondering if you have in fact been suffering
from depression. Let’s go ahead and see where you stand.
The Burns Depression Checklist (BDC) (see Table 2—1, page
20) is a reliable mood-measuring device that detects the pres-
ence of depression and accurately rates its severity.* This sim-
ple questionnaire will take only a few minutes to complete.
After you have completed the BDC, I will show you how to
make a simple interpretation of the results, based on your total
score. Then you will know immediately whether or not you
are suffering from a true depression and, if so, how severe it
is. I will also lay out some important guidelines to help you
determine whether you can safely and effectively treat your
own blue mood using this book as your guide, or whether
you have a more serious emotional disorder and might benefit
from professional intervention in addition to your own efforts
to help yourself.

As you fill out the questionnaire, read each item carefully
and put a check (,/) in the box that indicates how you have
been feeling during the past few days. Make sure you check
one answer for each of the twenty-five items.

If in doubt, make your best guess. Do not leave any
questions unanswered. Regardless of the outcome, this can
be your first step toward emotional improvement.

“Some readers may recall that I included the Beck Depression Inventory

19

20 David D. Burns, M.D.
Table 2—1. Burns Depression Checklist*

Instructions: Put a check (“) to indicate
how much you have experienced each
symptom during the past week,
including today. Please answer all 25
items.

2—Moderately

3—A Lot
4—Extremely

O—Not At All

Thoughts and Feelings
1. Feeling sad or down in the dumps
2. Feeling unhappy or blue

3. Crying spells or tearfulness

4. Feeling discouraged

5. Feeling hopeless

6. Low self-esteem

7. Feeling worthless or inadequate

8. Guilt or shame

9. Criticizing yourself or blaming yourself

10. Difficulty making decisions
Activities and Personal Relationships

11. Loss of interest in family, friends or
colleagues

12. Loneliness
13. Spending less time with family or friends

14. Loss of motivation
15. Loss of interest in work or other activities
16. Avoiding work or other activities

17. Loss of pleasure or satisfaction in life
Physical Symptoms

18. Feeling tired

19. Difficulty sleeping or sleeping too much

20. Decreased or increased appetite
21. Loss of interest in sex

22. Worrying about your health

FEELING GOOD

NJ

|

— GO i “ay

Burns Depression </ Els
Checklist </¢ 3
continued i =

m= ITN

Suicidal Urges** |

23. Do you have any suicidal thoughts? Pf | |
24. Would you like to end your life? Pf fd |
25. Do you have a plan for harming yourself? Ppt

Please Total Your Score on Items 1 to 25 Here —

*Copyright © 1984 by David D. Burns, M.D. (Revised, 1996.)
**Anyone with suicidal urges should seek help from a mental health
professional.

Interpreting the Burns Depression Checklist. Now that
you have completed the test, add up the score for each of
the twenty-five items and obtain the total. Since the highest
score you can get on each of the twenty-five symptoms is
4, the highest score for the whole test would be 100. (This
would indicate the most severe depression possible.) Since
the lowest score for each item is 0, the lowest score for the
test would be zero. (This would indicate no symptoms of
depression at all.)

You can now evaluate your depression according to Ta-
ble 2—2. As you can see, the higher the total score, the more
severe your depression. In contrast, the lower the score, the
better you are feeling.

Although the BDC is not difficult or time-consuming to
fill out and score, don’t be deceived by its simplicity. You
have just learned to use a highly sophisticated tool for de-

(BDI in the 1980 edition of Feeling Good. The BDI is a time-honored
instrument that has been used in hundreds of research studies on depres-
sion. Dr. Aaron Beck, the creator of this test, deserves a great deal of
credit for creating the BDI during the early 1960s. It was one of the first
instruments for measuring depression in clinical and research settings, and
I was grateful for his permission to reproduce it in the earlier edition of
Feeling Good.

22 David D. Burns, M.D.

Table 2—2. Interpreting the Burns Depression Checklist

Total Score Level of Depression*

0-5 no depression
6-10 normal but unhappy
{1-25 mild depression
26-50 moderate depression
51-75 severe depression
76-100 extreme depression
*Anyone with a persistent score above 10 may benefit from professional

treatment. Anyone with suicidal feelings should seek an immediate consul-
tation with a mental health professional.

tecting depression and measuring its severity. Research
studies have demonstrated that the BDC is highly accurate
and reliable. Studies in a variety of settings, such as psy-
chiatric emergency rooms, have indicated that instruments
of this type actually pick up the presence of depressive
symptoms far more frequently than formal interviews by
experienced clinicians.

*Mental health professionals may be interested to learn that the psycho-
metric properties of the BDC are excellent. The reliability of the twenty-
five-item BDC has been assessed in a group of ninety depressed
outpatients seeking treatment at the Center for Cognitive Therapy in Oak-
land, California, and in a group of 145 outpatients seeking treatment at a
Kaiser facility in Atlanta, Georgia. The reliability was extremely high and
identical in both groups (Cronbach’s coefficient alpha = 95%). The high
correlation between the BDC and the BDI r(68) = .88, p < .01 in the
Oakland group indicates that these two scales assess a similar if not iden-
tical construct. When both instruments were purged of errors of measure-
ment using structural equation modeling techniques, the correlation
between the scales was not significantly different from 1.0. The BDC was
also normed against the widely used depression subscale of the Hopkins
Symptom Checklist-90 in the Atlanta, Georgia, sample. The extremely
high correlation between the two measures 7(131) = .90, p < .01 further
confirmed the validity of the BDC.

Extensive clinical experience with the BDC in a variety of treatment
settings indicates it is well accepted by patients. Many have commented
that the test is easy to complete and score and helpful for tracking changes
in symptoms over time. A brief, five-item BDC with outstanding psycho-
metric properties has also been developed. The brief BDC is ideal for
testing patients on a session-by-session basis because patients can com-

FEELING GOOD 23

You can use the BDC with confidence to monitor your
progress as well. In my clinical work, I have insisted that
every patient must fill out the test on his or her own between
all sessions and report the score to me at the beginning of the
next session. Changes in the score show me whether the pa-
tient is getting better, worse, or staying the same.

As you apply the various self-help techniques described
in this book, take the BDC test at regular intervals to assess
your progress objectively. I suggest a minimum of once a
week. Compare it to weighing yourself regularly when
you’re on a diet. You will notice that various chapters in
this book focus on different symptoms of depression. As
you learn to overcome these symptoms, you will find that
your total score will begin to fall. This will show that you
are improving. When your score is under ten, you will be
in the range considered normal. When it is under five, you
will be feeling especially good. Ideally, I’d like to see your
score under five the majority of the time. This is one aim
of your treatment.

Is it safe for depressed individuals to try to help them-
selves using the principles and methods outlined in this
book? The answer is—definitely yes! This is because the
crucial decision to try to help yourself is the key that will
allow you to feel better as soon as possible, regardless of
how severe your mood disturbance might seem to be.

Under what conditions should you seek professional help?
If your score is between 0 and 5, you are probably feeling
good already. This is in the range of normal, and most people
with scores this low feel pretty happily contented.

If your score was between 6 and 10, it is still in the range
of normal, but you are probably feeling a bit on the ‘‘lumpy’”’
side. There’s room for improvement, a little mental ‘‘tune-
up,’’ if you will. The cognitive therapy techniques in this book
can often be remarkably helpful in these instances. Problems

plete it in less than one minute. It has performed well with adults and
adolescents in a variety of psychiatric and medical settings, including re-
cently arrested juveniles in the California judicial system. Mental health
professionals who are interesting in learning more about these and many
other assessment instruments that can be used in clinical or research set-
tings (including an electronic patient testing module) are cordially invited
to visit my Web site at www.FeelingGood.com

24 David D. Burns, M.D.

in daily living bug all of us, and a change of perspective can
often make a big difference in how you feel.

If your score was between 11 and 25, your depression,
at least at this time, is mild and should not be a cause for
alarm. You will definitely want to correct this problem, and
you may be able to make substantial progress on your own.
Systematic self-help efforts along the lines proposed in this
book, combined with frank communication on a number of
occasions with a trusted friend, may help a great deal. But
if your score remains in this range for more than a few
weeks, you should consider professional treatment. The
help of a therapist or an antidepressant medication may
considerably speed your recovery.

Some of the thorniest depressions I have treated were
actually individuals whose scores were in the mild range.
Often these individuals had been mildly depressed for
years, sometimes for most of their entire life. A mild
chronic depression that goes on and on is now called ‘“dys-
thymic disorder.’’ Although that is a big, fancy-sounding
term, it has a simple meaning. All it means is, “‘this person
is awfully gloomy and negative most of the time.’’ You
probably know someone who is like that, and you may have
fallen into spells of pessimism yourself. Fortunately, the
same methods in this book that have proven so helpful for
severe depressions can also be very helpful for these mild,
chronic depressions.

If you scored between 26 and 50 on the BDC, it means
you are moderately depressed. But don’t be fooled by the
term, “‘moderate.’’ A score in this range can indicate pretty
intense suffering. Most of us can feel quite upset for brief
periods, but we usually snap out of it. If your score remains
in this range for more than two weeks, you should definitely
seek professional treatment.

If your score was above 50, it indicates your depression
is severe or even extreme. This degree of suffering can be
almost unbearable, especially when the score is increased
above 75. Your moods are apt to be intensely uncomfort-
able and possibly dangerous because the feelings of despair
and hopelessness may even trigger suicidal impulses.

Fortunately, the prognosis for successful treatment is ex-
cellent. In fact, sometimes the most severe depressions re-

FEELING GOOD 25

spond the most rapidly. But it is not wise to try to treat a
severe depression on your own. A professional consultation
is a must. Seek out a trusted and competent counselor.

Even if you receive psychotherapy or antidepressant
medications, I am convinced you can still benefit greatly
by applying what I teach you. My research studies have
indicated that the spirit of self-help greatly speeds up re-
covery, even when patients receive professional treatment.

In addition to evaluating your total score on the BDC, be
sure you pay special attention to items 23, 24, and 25. These
items ask about suicidal feelings, urges, and plans. If you had
elevated scores on any of these items, I would strongly rec-
ommend that you obtain professional help right away.

Many depressed individuals have elevated scores on item
23, but zeros on items 24 and 25. This usually means they
have suicidal thoughts, such as ‘‘I’d probably be better off
dead,’’ but no actual suicidal intentions or urges and no
plans to commit suicide. This pattern is quite common. If
your scores on item 24 or 25 are elevated, however, this is
a cause for alarm. Seek treatment immediately!

I have provided some effective methods for assessing and
reversing suicidal impulses in a later chapter, but you must
consult a professional when suicide begins to appear to be
a desirable or necessary option. Your conviction that you
are hopeless is the reason to seek treatment, not suicide.
The majority of seriously depressed individuals believe
they are hopeless beyond any shadow of a doubt. This de-
structive delusion is merely a symptom of the illness, not
a fact. Your feeling that you are hopeless is powerful evi-
dence that you are actually not!

It is also important for you to look at item 22, which
asks if you have been more worried about your health re-
cently. Have you experienced any unexplained aches, pains,
fever. weight loss, or other possible symptoms of medical
illness? If so, it would be worthwhile to have a medical
consultation, which would include a history, a complete
physical examination, and laboratory tests. Your doctor will
probably give you a clean bill of health. This will suggest
that your uncomfortable physical symptoms are related to
your emotional state. Depression can mimic a great number
of medical disorders because your mood swings often cre-

26 David D. Burns, M.D.

ate a wide variety of puzzling physical symptoms. These
include, to name just a few, constipation, diarrhea, pain,
insomnia or the tendency to sleep too much, fatigue, loss
of sexual interest, light-headedness, trembling, and numb-
ness. As your depression improves, these symptoms will in
all likelihood vanish. However, keep in mind that many
treatable illnesses may initially masquerade as depression,
and a medical examination could reveal an early (and life-
saving) diagnosis of a reversible organic disorder.

There are a number of symptoms that indicate—but do
not prove—the existence of a serious mental disturbance,
and these require a consultation with and possible treatment
by a mental-health professional, in addition to the self-
administered personal-growth program in this book. Some
of the major symptoms include: the belief that people are
plotting and conspiring against you in order to hurt you or
take your life; a bizarre experience which the ordinary per-
son cannot understand; the conviction that external forces
are controlling your mind or body; the feeling that other
people can hear your thoughts or read your mind; hearing
voices from outside your head; seeing things that aren’t
there; and receiving personal messages broadcast from ra-
dio or television programs.

These symptoms are not a part of depressive illness, but
represent major mental disorders. Psychiatric treatment is a
must. Quite often, people with these symptoms are con-
vinced that nothing is wrong with them, and may meet the
suggestion to seek psychiatric therapy with suspicious re-
sentment and resistance. In contrast, if you are harboring
the deep fear that you are going insane and are experiencing
episodes of panic in which you sense you are losing control
or going over the deep end, it is a near certainty that you
are not. These are typical symptoms of ordinary anxiety, a
much less serious disorder.

Mania is a special type of mood disorder with which you
should be familiar. Mania is the opposite of depression and
requires prompt intervention by a psychiatrist who can pre-
scribe lithium. Lithium stabilizes extreme mood swings and
allows the patient to lead a normal life. However, until ther-
apy is initiated, the disease can be emotionally destructive.
The symptoms include an abnormally elated or irritable

FEELING GOOD 27

mood that persists for at least two days and is not caused
by drugs or alcohol. The manic patient’s behavior is char-
acterized by impulsive actions which reflect poor judgment
(such as irresponsible, excessive spending) along with a
grandiose sense of self-confidence. Mania is accompanied
by increased sexual or aggressive activity; hyperactive, con-
tinuous body movements; racing thoughts; nonstop, excited
talking; and a decreased need to sleep. Manic individuals
have the delusion that they are extraordinarily powerful and
brilliant, and often insist they are on the verge of some
philosophical or scientific breakthrough or lucrative money-
making scheme. Many famous creative individuals suffer
from this illness and manage to control it with lithium. Be-
cause the disease feels so good, individuals who are having
their first attack often cannot be convinced to seek treat-
ment. The first symptoms are so intoxicating that the victim
resists accepting the idea that his or her sudden acquisition
of self-confidence and inner ecstasy is actually just a man-
ifestation of a destructive illness.

After a while, the euphoric state may escalate into un-
controllable delirium requiring involuntary hospitalization,
or it may just as suddenly switch into an incapacitating
depression with pronounced immobility and apathy. I want
you to be familiar with the symptoms of mania because a
significant percentage of individuals who experience a true
major depressive episode will at some later time develop
these symptoms. When this occurs, the personality of the
afflicted individual undergoes a profound transformation
over a period of days or weeks. While psychotherapy and
a Self-help program can be extremely helpful, concomitant
treatment with lithium under medical supervision is a must
for an optimal response. With such treatment the prognosis
for manic illness is excellent.

Let’s assume that you do not have a strong suicidal urge,
hallucinations, or symptoms of mania. Instead of moping
and feeling miserable, you can now proceed to get better,
using the methods outlined in this book. You can start en-
joying life and work, and use the energy spent in being
depressed for vital and creative living.

Chapter 3

Understanding Your Moods:
You Feel the Way You Think

As you read the previous chapter, you became aware of
how extensive the effects of depression are—your mood
slumps, your self-image crumbles, your body doesn’t func-
tion properly, your willpower becomes paralyzed, and your
actions defeat you. That’s why you feel so totally down in
the dumps. What’s the key to it all?

Because depression has been viewed as an emotional
disorder throughout the history of psychiatry, therapists
from most schools of thought place a strong emphasis on
‘*getting in touch’’ with your feelings. Our research reveals
the unexpected: Depression is not an emotional disorder at
all! The sudden change in the way you feel is of no more
causal relevance than a runny nose is when you have a cold.
Every bad feeling you have is the result of your distorted
negative thinking. [llogical pessimistic attitudes play the
central role in the development and continuation of all your
symptoms.

Intense negative thinking always accompanies a depres-
sive episode, or any painful emotion for that matter. Your
moody thoughts are likely to be entirely different from those
you have when you are not upset. A young woman, about
to receive her Ph.D., expressed it this way:

FEELING GOOD 29

Every time I become depressed, I feel as if I have been
hit with a sudden cosmic jolt, and I begin to see things
differently. The change can come within less than an
hour. My thoughts become negative and pessimistic.
As I look into the past, I become convinced that every-
thing that I’ve ever done is worthless. Any happy pe-
riod seems like an illusion. My accomplishments
appear as genuine as the false facade for the set of a
Western movie. I become convinced that the real me
is worthless and inadequate. I can’t move forward with
my work because I become frozen with doubt. But I
can’t stand still because the misery is unbearable.

You will learn, as she did, that the negative thoughts that
flood your mind are the actual cause of your self-defeating
emotions. These thoughts are what keep you lethargic and
make you feel inadequate. Your negative thoughts, or cog-
nitions, are the most frequently overlooked symptoms of
your depression. These cognitions contain the key to relief
and are therefore your most important symptoms.

Every time you feel depressed about something, try to
identify a corresponding negative thought you had just prior
to and during the depression. Because these thoughts have
actually created your bad mood, by learning to restructure
them, you can change your mood.

You are probably skeptical of all this because your neg-
ative thinking has become such a part of your life that it
has become automatic. For this reason I call negative
thoughts “‘automatic thoughts.’’ They run through your
mind automatically without the slightest effort on your part
to put them there. They are as obvious and natural to you
as the way you hold a fork.

The relationship between the way you think and the way
you feel is diagramed in Figure 3—1. This illustrates the first
major key to understanding your moods: Your emotions
result entirely from the way you /ook at things. It is an
obvious neurological fact that before you can experience
any event, you must process it with your mind and give it

30 David D. Burns, M.D.

Figure 3—1. The relationship between the world and the way you
feel. It is not the actual events but your perceptions that result in
changes in mood. When you are sad, your thoughts will represent
a realistic interpretation of negative events. When you are de-
pressed or anxious, your thoughts will always be illogical, dis-
torted, unrealistic, or just plain wrong.

THOUGHTS: You interpret the events
with a series of thoughts that contin-

ually flow through your mind. This is
called your “internal dialogue.”

WORLD: A series MOOD: Your feel-
of positive, neutral, ~ ings are created
by your thoughts
and not the actual
events. All experi-
ences must be

and negative
events.

processed through
your brain and
given a conscious
meaning before
you experience
any emotional re-
sponse.

meaning. You must understand what is happening to you
before you can feel it.

If your understanding of what is happening is accurate,
your emotions will be normal. If your perception is twisted
and distorted in some way, your emotional response will be
abnormal. Depression falls into this category. It is always
the result of mental ‘‘static’’—distortions. Your blue moods

FEELING GOOD 31

can be compared to the scratchy music coming from a radio
that is not properly tuned to the station. The problem is not
that the tubes or transistors are blown out or defective,
or that the signal from the radio station is distorted as a
result of bad weather. You just simply have to adjust the
dials. When you learn to bring about this mental tuning,
the music will come through clearly again and your depres-
sion will lift.

Some readers—maybe you—will experience a pang of
despair when they read that paragraph. Yet there is nothing
upsetting about it. If anything, the paragraph should bring
hope. Then what caused your mood to plunge as you were
reading? It was your thought, “‘For other people a little
tuning may suffice. But I’m the radio that is broken beyond
repair. My tubes are blown out. I don’t care if ten thousand
other depressed patients all get well—I’m convinced beyond
any shadow of doubt that my problems are hopeless.’’ I
hear this statement fifty times a week! Nearly every de-
pressed person seems convinced beyond all rhyme or reason
that he or she is the special one who really is beyond hope.
This delusion reflects the kind of mental processing that is
at the very core of your illness!

I have always been fascinated by the ability certain people
have to create illusions. As a child, I used to spend hours
at the local library, reading books on magic. Saturdays I
would hang out in magic stores for hours, watching the man
behind the counter produce remarkable effects with cards
and silks and chromium spheres that floated through the air,
defying all the laws of common sense. One of my happiest
childhood memories is when I was eight years old and saw
‘*Blackstone—World’s Greatest Magician’’ perform in
Denver, Colorado. I was invited with several other children
from the audience to come up on stage. Blackstone in-
structed us to place our hands on a two-feet by two-feet
birdcage filled with live white doves until the top, bottom,
and all four sides were enclosed entirely by our hands. He
stood nearby and said, “Stare at the cage!’’ I did. My eyes
were bulging and I refused to blink. He exclaimed, “‘Now

32 David D. Burns, M.D.

Pll clap my hands.’’ He did. In that instant the cage of birds
vanished. My hands were suspended in empty air. It was
impossible! Yet it happened! I was stunned.

Now I know that his ability as an illusionist was no greater
than that of the average depressed patient. This includes
you. When you are depressed, you possess the remarkable
ability to believe, and to get the people around you to be-
lieve, things which have no basis in reality. As a therapist,
it is my job to penetrate your illusion, to teach you how to
look behind the mirrors so you can see how you have been
fooling yourself. You might even say that I’m planning to
dis-illusion you! But I don’t think you’re going to mind at
all.

Read over the following list of ten cognitive distortions
that form the basis of all your depressions. Get a feel for
them. I have prepared this list with great care; it represents
the distilled essence of many years of research and clinical
experience. Refer to it over and over when you read the
how-to-do-it section of the book. When you are feeling
upset, the list will be invaluable in making you aware of
how you are fooling yourself.

Definitions of Cognitive Distortions

1. All-or-Nothing Thinking. This refers to your ten-
dency to evaluate your personal qualities in extreme, black-
or-white categories. For example, a prominent politician
told me, ‘‘Because I lost the race for governor, I’m a zero.”’
A straight-A student who received a B on an exam con-
cluded, ‘“Now I’m a total failure.’’ All-or-nothing thinking
forms the basis for perfectionism. It causes you to fear any
mistake or imperfection because you will then see yourself
as a complete loser, and you will feel inadequate and worth-
less.

This way of evaluating things is unrealistic because life
is rarely completely either one way or the other. For ex-
ample, no one is absolutely brilliant or totally stupid. Sim-

FEELING GOOD 33

ilarly, no one is either completely attractive or totally ugly.
Look at the floor of the room you are sitting in now. Is it
perfectly clean? Is every inch piled high with dust and dirt?
Or is it partially clean? Absolutes do not exist in this uni-
verse. If you try to force your experiences into absolute
categories, you will be constantly depressed because your
perceptions will not conform to reality. You will set yourself
up for discrediting yourself endlessly because whatever you
do will never measure up to your exaggerated expectations.
The technical name for this type of perceptual error is ‘‘di-
chotomous thinking.’’ You see everything as black or
white—shades of gray do not exist.

2. Overgeneralization. When I was eleven years old, I
bought a deck of trick cards at the Arizona State Fair called
the Svengali Deck. You may have seen this simple but
impressive illusion yourself: I show the deck to you—every
card is different. You choose a card at random. Let’s assume
you pick the Jack of Spades. Without telling me what card
it is, you replace it in the deck. Now I exclaim, “‘Svengali!”’
As I turn the deck over, every card has turned into the Jack
of Spades.

When you overgeneralize, this is performing the mental
equivalent of Svengali. You arbitrarily conclude that one
thing that happened to you once will occur over and over
again, will multiply like the Jack of Spades. Since what
happened is invariably unpleasant, you feel upset.

A depressed salesman noticed bird dung on his car win-
dow and thought, “‘That’s just my luck. The birds are always
crapping on my window!’’ This is a perfect example of
overgeneralization. When I asked him about this experience,
he admitted that in twenty years of traveling, he could not
remember another time when he found bird dung on his car
window.

The pain of rejection is generated almost entirely from
overgeneralization. In its absence, a personal affront is tem-
porarily disappointing but- cannot be seriously disturbing.
A shy young man mustered up his courage to ask a girl for

34 David D. Burns, M.D.

a date. When she politely declined because of a previous
engagement, he said to himself, ‘‘I’m never going to get a
date. No girl would ever want a date with me. I’ll be lonely
and miserable all my life.’’ In his distorted cognitions, he
concluded that because she turned him down once, she
would always do so, and that since all women have 100
percent identical tastes, he would be endlessly and repeat-
edly rejected by any eligible woman on the face of the earth.
Svengali!

3. Mental Filter. You pick out a negative detail in any
situation and dwell on it exclusively, thus perceiving that
the whole situation is negative. For example, a depressed
college student heard some other students making fun of
her best friend. She became furious because she was think-
ing, “‘That’s what the human race is basically like—cruel
and insensitive!’’ She was overlooking the fact that in the
previous months few people, if any, had been.cruel or in-
sensitive to her! On another occasion when she completed
her first midterm exam, she felt certain she had missed
approximately seventeen questions out of a hundred. She
thought exclusively about those seventeen questions and
concluded she would flunk out of college. When she got
the paper back there was a note attached that read, “‘You
got 83 out of 100 correct. This was by far the highest grade
of any student this year. A+’”’

When you are depressed, you wear a pair of eyeglasses
with special lenses that filter out anything positive. All that
you allow to enter your conscious mind 1s negative. Because
you are not aware of this “‘filtering process,’’ you conclude
that everything is negative. The technical name for this
process is ‘‘selective abstraction.’’ It is a bad habit that can
cause you to suffer much needless anguish.

4. Disqualifying the Positive. An even more spectacular
mental illusion is the persistent tendency of some depressed
individuals to transform neutral or even positive experiences
into negative ones. You don’t just ignore positive experi-

FEELING GOOD 35

ences, you cleverly and swiftly turn them into their night-
marish opposite. I call this ‘“‘reverse alchemy.’’ The
medieval alchemists dreamed of finding some method for
transmuting the baser metals into gold. If you have been
depressed, you may have developed the talent for doing the
exact opposite—you can instantly transform golden joy into
emotional lead. Not intentionally, however—you’re prob-
ably not even aware of what you’re doing to yourself.

An everyday example of this would be the way most of
us have been conditioned to respond to compliments. When
someone praises your appearance or your work, you might
automatically tell yourself, ‘“They’re just being nice.’’ With
one swift blow you mentally disqualify their compliment.
You do the same thing to them when you tell them, ‘‘Oh,
it was nothing, really.’’ If you constantly throw cold water
on the good things that happen, no wonder life seems damp
and chilly to you!

Disqualifying the positive is one of the most. destructive
forms of cognitive distortion. You’re like a scientist intent
on finding evidence to support some pet hypothesis. The
hypothesis that dominates your depressive thinking is usu-
ally some version of “‘I’m second-rate.’’ Whenever you
have a negative experience, you dwell on it and conclude,
‘*That proves what I’ve known all along.’’ In contrast, when
you have a positive experience, you tell yourself, ‘‘That
was a fluke. It doesn’t count.’’ The price you pay for this
tendency is intense misery and an inability to appreciate the
good things that happen.

While this type of cognitive distortion is commonplace,
it can also form the basis for some of the most extreme and
intractable forms of depression. For example, a young
woman hospitalized during a severe depressive episode told
me, ‘‘No one could possibly care about me because I’m
such an awful person. I’m a complete loner. Not one person
on earth gives a damn about me.’’ When she was discharged
from the hospital, many patients and staff members ex-
pressed great fondness for her. Can you guess how she
negated all this? ‘“They don’t count because they don’t see

36 David D. Burns, M.D.

me in the real world. A real person outside a hospital could
never care about me.’’ I then asked her how she reconciled
this with the fact that she had numerous friends and family
outside the hospital who did care about her. She replied,
‘“They don’t count because they don’t know the real me.
You see Dr. Burns, inside I’m absolutely rotten. I’m the
worst person in the world. It would be impossible for anyone
to really like me for even one moment!’’ By disqualifying
positive experiences in this manner, she can maintain a
negative belief which is clearly unrealistic and inconsistent
with her everyday experiences.

While your negative thinking is probably not as extreme
as hers, there may be many times every day when you do
inadvertently ignore genuinely positive things that have hap-
pened to you. This removes much of life’s richness and
makes things appear needlessly bleak.

5. Jumping to Conclusions. You arbitrarily jump to a
negative conclusion that is not justified by the facts of the
situation. Two examples of this are ‘‘mind reading’’ and
‘‘the fortune teller error.”’

MIND READING: You make the assumption that other peo-
ple are looking down on you, and you’re so convinced about
this that you don’t even bother to check it out. Suppose you
are giving an excellent lecture, and you notice that a man
in the front row is nodding off. He was up most of the night
on a wild fling, but you of course don’t know this. You
might have the thought, ‘‘This audience thinks I’m a bore.”’
Suppose a friend passes you on the street and fails to say
hello because he is so absorbed in his thoughts he doesn’t
nctice you. You might erroneously conclude, “‘He is ig-
noring me so he must not like me anymore.’’ Perhaps your
spouse is unresponsive one evening because he or she was
criticized at work and is too upset to want to talk about it.
Your heart sinks because of the way you interpret the si-
lence: ‘‘He (or she) is mad at me. What did I do wrong?’’

You may then respond to these imagined negative reac-
tions by withdrawal or counterattack. This self-defeating

FEELING GOOD 37

behavior pattern may act as a Self-fulfilling prophecy and
set up a negative interaction in a relationship when none
exists in the first place.

THE FORTUNE TELLER ERROR: It’s as if you had a crystal
ball that foretold only misery for you. You imagine that
something bad is about to happen, and you take this pre-
diction as a fact even though it is unrealistic. A high-school
librarian repeatedly told herself during anxiety attacks, ““I’m
going to pass out or go crazy.’’ These predictions were
unrealistic because she had never once passed out (or gone
crazy!) in her entire life. Nor did she have any serious
symptoms to suggest impending insanity. During a therapy
session an acutely depressed physician explained to me why
he was giving up his practice: ‘‘I realize I’ll be depressed
forever. My misery will go on and on, and I’m absolutely
convinced that this or any treatment will be doomed to
failure.’’ This negative prediction about his prognosis
caused him to feel hopeless. His symptomatic improvement
soon after initiating therapy indicated just how off-base his
fortune telling had been.

Do you ever find yourself jumping to conclusions like
these? Suppose you telephone a friend who fails to return
your call after a reasonable time. You then feel depressed
when you tell yourself that your friend probably got the
message but wasn’t interested enough to call you back. Your
distorton?—mind reading. You then feel bitter, and decide
not to call back and check this out because you say to
yourself, “‘He’ll think I’m being obnoxious if I call him
back again. I'll only make a fool of myself.’’ Because of
these negative predictions (the fortune teller error), you
avoid your friend and feel put down. Three weeks later you
learn that your friend never got your message. All that
stewing, it turns out, was just a lot of self-imposed hokum.
Another painful product of your mental magic!

6. Magnification and Minimization. Another thinking
trap you might fall into 1s called ‘‘magnification’’ and ‘‘min-
imization,’’ but I like to think of it as the ‘‘binocular trick’’

38 David D. Burns, M.D.

because you are either blowing things up out of proportion
or shrinking them. Magnification commonly occurs when
you look at your own errors, fears, or imperfections and
exaggerate their importance: ‘““My God—I made a mistake.
How terrible! How awful! The word will spread like wild-
fire! My reputation is ruined!’’ You’re looking at your faults
through the end of the binoculars that makes them appear
gigantic and grotesque. This has also been called ‘“catas-
trophizing’’ because you turn commonplace negative events
into nightmarish monsters.

When you think about your strengths, you may do the
opposite—look through the wrong end of the binoculars so
that things look small and unimportant. If you magnify your
imperfections and minimize your good points, you’re guar-
anteed to feel inferior. But the problem isn’t you—it’s the
crazy lenses you’re wearing!

7. Emotional Reasoning. You take your emotions as
evidence for the truth. Your logic: ‘‘I feel like a dud, there-
fore I am a dud.”’ This kind of reasoning is misleading
because your feelings reflect your thoughts and beliefs. If
they are distorted—as is quite often the case—your emotions
will have no validity. Examples of emotional reasoning
include ‘‘I feel guilty. Therefore, I must have done some-
thing bad’’; “*I feel overwhelmed and hopeless. Therefore,
my problems must be impossible to solve’’; ‘‘I feel inad-
equate. Therefore, [ must be a worthless person’’; ‘‘I’m not
in the mood to do anything. Therefore, I might as well just
lie in bed’’; or ‘‘?’m mad at you. This proves that you’ve
been acting rotten and trying to take advantage of me.’’

Emotional reasoning plays a role in nearly all your depres-
sions. Because things feel so negative to you, you assume
they truly are. It doesn’t occur to you to challenge the
validity of the perceptions that create your feelings.

One usual side effect of emotional reasoning is procras-
tination. You avoid cleaning up your desk because you tell
yourself, ‘‘I feel so lousy when I think about that messy
desk, cleaning it will be impossible.’’ Six months later you

FEELING GOOD 39

finally give yourself a little push and do it. It turns out to
be quite gratifying and not so tough at all. You were fooling
yourself all along because you are in the habit of letting
your negative feelings guide the way you act.

8. Should Statements. You try to motivate yourself by
saying, “‘I should do this’’ or ‘‘I must do that.’’ These
statements cause you to feel pressured and resentful. Par-
adoxically, you end up feeling apathetic and unmotivated.
Albert Ellis calls this ‘‘musturbation.’’ I call it the
‘‘shouldy’’ approach to life.

When you direct should statements toward others, you
will usually feel frustrated. When an emergency caused me
to be five minutes late for the first therapy session, the new
patient thought, “‘He shouldn’t be so self-centered and
thoughtless. He ought to be prompt.’ This thought caused
her to feel sour and resentful.

Should statements generate a lot of unnecessary emotional
turmoil in your daily life. When the reality of your own
behavior falls short of your standards, your shoulds and
shouldn’ts create self-loathing, shame, and guilt. When the
all-too-human performance of other people falls short of
your expectations, as will inevitably happen from time to
time, you’ll feel bitter and self-righteous. You’ll either have
to change your expectations to approximate reality or always
feel let down by human behavior. If you recognize this bad
should habit in yourself, I have outlined many effective
‘‘should and shouldn’t’’ removal methods in later chapters
on guilt and anger.

9. Labeling and Mislabeling. Personal labeling means
creating a completely negative self-image based on your
errors. It is an extreme form of overgeneralization. The
philosophy behind it is ‘“The measure of a man is the mis-
takes he makes.’’ There is a good chance you are involved
in a personal labeling whenever you describe your mistakes
with sentences beginning with ‘“‘’ma...’’ For example,
when you miss your putt on the eighteenth hole, you might

40 David D. Burns, M.D.

say, “‘I’m a born loser’’ instead of ‘‘I goofed up on my
putt.’ Similarly, when the stock you invested in goes down
instead of up, you might think, ‘‘/’m a failure’’ instead of
“*T made a mistake.’’

Labeling yourself is not only self-defeating, it is irra-
tional. Your se/f cannot be equated with any one thing you
do. Your life is a complex and ever-changing flow of
thoughts, emotions, and actions. To put it another way, you
are more like a river than a statue. Stop trying to define
yourself with negative labels—they are overly simplistic and
wrong. Would you think of yourself exclusively as an
“‘eater’’ just because you eat, or a ““breather’’ just because
you breathe? This is nonsense, but such nonsense becomes
painful when you label yourself out of a sense of your own
inadequacies

When you label other people, you will invariably gen-
erate hostility. A common example 1s the boss who sees
his occasionally irritable secretary as “‘an uncooperative
bitch.’’ Because of this label, he resents her and jumps at
every chance to criticize her. She, in turn, labels him an
“‘insensitive chauvinist’’ and complains about him at every
opportunity. So, around and around they go at each other’s
throats, focusing on every weakness or imperfection as
proof of the other’s worthlessness.

Mislabeling involves describing an event with words that
are inaccurate and emotionally heavily loaded. For example,
a woman on a diet ate a dish of ice cream and thought,
‘‘How disgusting and repulsive of me. I’m a pig.’’ These
thoughts made her so upset she ate the whole quart of ice
cream!

10. Personalization. This distortion is the mother of
guilt! You assume responsibility for a negative even when
there is no basis for doing so. You arbitrarily conclude that
what happened was your fault or reflects your inadequacy,
even when you were not responsible for it. For example,
when a patient didn’t do a self-help assignment I had sug-

FEELING GOOD 41

gested, I felt guilty because of my thought, ‘*I must be a
lousy therapist. It’s my fault that she isn’t working harder
to help herself. It’s my responsibility to make sure she gets
well.’ When a mother saw her child’s report card, there
was a note from the teacher indicating the child was not
working well. She immediately decided, ‘‘I must be a bad
mother. This shows how I’ve failed.’’

Personalization causes you to feel crippling guilt. You
suffer from a paralyzing and burdensome sense of respon-
sibility that forces you to carry the whole world on your
shoulders. You have confused influence with control over
others. In your role as a teacher, counselor, parent, phy-
Sician, Salesman, executive, you will certainly influence the
people you interact with, but no one could reasonably expect
you to control them. What the other person does is ultimately
his or her responsibility, not yours. Methods to help you
overcome your tendency to personalize and trim your sense
of responsibility down to manageable, realistic proportions
will be discussed later on in this book. ,

The ten forms of cognitive distortions cause many, if not
all, of your depressed states. They are summarized in Table
3—1 on page 42. Study this table and master these concepts;
try to become as familiar with them as with your phone
number. Refer to Table 3—1 over and over again as you
learn about the various methods for mood modification.
When you become familiar with these ten forms of distor-
tion, you will benefit from this knowledge all your life.

I have prepared a simple self-assessment quiz to help you
test and strengthen your understanding of the ten distortions.
As you read each of the following brief vignettes, imagine
you are the person who is being described. Circle one or
more answers which indicate the distortions contained in
the negative thoughts. I will explain the answer to the first
question. The answer key to subsequent questions is given
at the end of this chapter. But don’t look ahead! I’m certain
you will be able to identify at least one distortion in the first
question—and that will be a start!

Table 3-1. Definitions of Cognitive Distortions

1.

ALL-OR-NOTHING THINKING: You see things in
black-and-white categories. If your performance falls short
of perfect, you see yourself as a total failure.

. OVERGENERALIZATION: You see a single negative

event as a never-ending pattern of defeat.

. MENTAL FILTER: You pick out a single negative detail

and dwell on it exclusively so that your vision of all reality
becomes darkened, like the drop of ink that colors the entire
beaker of water.

. DISQUALIFYING THE POSITIVE: You reject positive

experiences by insisting they “don’t count’’ for some rea-
son or other. In this way you can maintain a negative belief
that is contradicted by your everyday experiences.

. JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS: You make a negative

interpretation even though there are no definite facts that
convincingly support your conclusion.

a. Mind reading. You arbitrarily conclude that someone
is reacting negatively to you, and you don’t bother to
check this out.

b. The Fortune Teller Error. You anticipate that things
will turn out badly, and you feel convinced that your
prediction is an already-established fact.

. MAGNIFICATION (CATASTROPHIZING) OR MINI-

MIZATION: You exaggerate the importance of things
(such as your goof-up or someone else’s achievement), or
you inappropriately shrink things until they appear tiny
(your own desirable qualities or the other fellow’s imper-
fections). This is also called the ‘“binocular trick.’’

. EMOTIONAL REASONING: You assume that your neg-

ative emotions necessarily reflect the way things really are:
‘‘T feel it, therefore it must be true.”’

. SHOULD STATEMENTS: You try to motivate yourself

with shoulds and shouldn’ts, as if you had to be whipped
and punished before you could be expected to do anything.
‘‘Musts’’ and ‘‘oughts’’ are also offenders. The emotional
consequence is guilt. When you direct should statements
toward others, you feel anger, frustration, and resentment.

FEELING GOOD 43

Table 3—1. cont.

9. LABELING AND MISLABELING: This is an extreme
form of overgeneralization. Instead of describing your |
error, you attach a negative label to yourself: ““‘I’m a
loser.’’ When someone else’s behavior rubs you the wrong
way, you attach a negative label to him: ‘‘He’s a goddam
louse.’’ Mislabeling involves describing an event with
language that is highly colored and emotionally loaded.

10. PERSONALIZATION: You see yourself as the cause of

some negative external event which in fact you were not

primarily responsible for.

1. You are a housewife, and your heart sinks when your
husband has just complained disgruntledly that the roast beef
was overdone. The following thought crosses your mind:
‘Tm a total failure. I can’t stand it! I never do anything
right. I work like a slave and this is all the thanks I get!
The jerk!’’ These thoughts cause you to feel sad and angry.
Your distortions include one or more of the following:
all-or-nothing thinking;

. overgeneralization;
magnification;
. labeling;

e. all the above.

Now I will discuss the correct answers to this question
so you can get some immediate feedback. Any answer(s)
you might have circled was (were) correct. So 1f you circled
anything, you were right! Here’s why. When you tell your-
self, ‘‘’'m a total failure,’’ you engage in all-or-nothing
thinking. Cut it out! The meat was a little dry, but that
doesn’t make your entire life a total failure. When you think,
‘**Y never do anything right,’’ you are overgeneralizing.
Never? Come on now! Not anything? When you tell your-
self, ‘‘I can’t stand it,’’ you are magnifying the pain you
are feeling. You’re blowing it way out of proportion because
you are standing it, and if you are, you can. Your husband’s
grumbling is not exactly what you like to hear, but it’s not

aAoc¢p

44 David D. Burns, M.D.

a reflection of your worth. Finally, when you proclaim, °‘I
work like a slave and this is all the thanks I get! The jerk!”’
you are labeling both of you. He’s not a jerk, he’s just being
irritable and insensitive. Jerky behavior exists, but jerks do
not. Similarly, it’s silly to label yourself a slave. You’re
just letting his moodiness sour your evening.

Okay, now let’s continue with the quiz.

2. You have just read the sentence in which I informed
you that you would have to take this self-assessment quiz.
Your heart suddenly sinks and you think, ‘“Oh no, not other
test! I always do lousy on tests. Ill have to skip this section
of the book. It makes me nervous, so it wouldn’t help
anyway.’ Your distortions include:

. Jumping to conclusions (fortune teller error);
. Overgeneralization;

. all-or-nothing thinking;

. personalization;

. emotional reasoning.

oO MaO & &

3. You are a psychiatrist at the University of Pennsyl-
vania. You are attempting to revise your manuscript on
depression after meeting with your editor in New York.
Although your editor seemed extremely enthusiastic, you
notice you are feeling nervous and inadequate due to your
thoughts, ““They made a terrible mistake when they chose
my book! I won’t be able to do a good job. Ill never be
able to make the book fresh, lively, and punchy. My writing
is too drab, and my ideas aren’t good enough.’’ Your cog-
nitive distortions include:

. all-or-nothing thinking;

. Jumping to conclusions (negative prediction);
. mental filter;

. disqualifying the positive;

. magnification.

oo Oo &

FEELING GOOD 45

4. You are lonely and you decide to attend a social affair
for singles. Soon after you get there, you have the urge to
leave because you feel anxious and defensive. The following
thoughts run through your mind: ““They probably aren’t very
interesting people. Why torture myself? They’re just a bunch
of losers. I can tell because I feel so bored. This party will
be a drag.’’ Your errors involve:

. labeling;

. magnification;

. Jumping to conclusions (fortune teller error and mind
reading);

. emotional reasoning;

. personalization.

Qo

Oo O.

5. You receive a layoff notice from your employer. You
feel mad and frustrated. You think, ‘“This proves the world
is no damn good. | never get a break.’’ Your distortions
include:

. all-or-nothing thinking;

. disqualifying the positive;
mental filter;

. personalization;

should statement.

CHAOTP

6. You are about to give a lecture and you notice that
your heart is pounding. You feel tense and nervous because
you think, “‘My God, Ill probably forget what I’m supposed
to say. My speech isn’t any good anyway. My mind will
blank out. Il] make a fool of myself.’’ Your thinking errors
involve:

. all-or-nothing thinking;

. disqualifying the positive;

. jumping to conclusions (fortune teller error);
. minimization;

. labeling.

om & &

46 David D. Burns, M.D.

7. Your date calls you at the last minute to cancel out
because of illness. You feel angry and disappointed because
you think, ‘‘I’m getting jilted. What did I do to foul things
up?’’ Your thinking errors include:

. all-or-nothing thinking;

. Should statements;

. Jumping to conclusions (mind reading);
. personalization;

. overgeneralization.

oa. O &

8. You have put off writing a report for work. Every
night when you try to get down to it, the whole project
seems so difficult that you watch TV instead. You begin to
feel overwhelmed and guilty. You are thinking the follow-
ing: ‘‘I’m so lazy Pll never get this done. I just can’t do
the darn thing. It would take forever. It won’t turn out right
anyway.’’ Your thinking errors include:

. Jumping to conclusions (fortune teller error);
. overgeneralization;

. labeling;

. magnification;

. emotional reasoning.

omM°0 & &

9. You’ve read this entire book and after applying the
methods for several weeks, you begin to feel better. Your
BDC score went down from twenty-six (moderately de-
pressed) to eleven (borderline depression). Then you sud-
denly begin to feel worse, and in three days your score has
gone back up to twenty-eight. You feel disillusioned, hope-
less, bitter, and desperate due to thinking, ‘‘I’m not getting
anywhere. These methods won’t help me after all. I should
be well by now. That ‘improvement’ was a fluke. I was
fooling myself when I thought I was feeling better. I'll
never get well.’’ Your cognitive distortions include:

a. disqualifying the positive;

b. should statement;

c. emotional reasoning;

FEELING GOOD 47

d. all-or-nothing thinking;
e. jumping to conclusions (negative prediction).

10. You’ve been trying to diet. This weekend you’ve
been nervous, and, since you didn’t have anything to do,
you’ve been nibbling, nibbling. After your fourth piece of
candy, you tell yourself, ‘‘I just can’t control myself. My
dieting and jogging all week have gone down the drain. I
must look like a balloon. I shouldn’t have eaten that. I can’t
stand this. I’m going to pig out all weekend!’’ You begin
to feel so guilty you push another handful of candy into
your mouth in an abortive effort to feel better. Your dis-
tortions include:

. all-or-nothing thinking;

. mislabeling;

. negative prediction;

. Should statement;

. disqualifying the positive.

a
b
c
d
e

ANSWER KEY
E 6.

Feelings Aren't Facts

At this point you may be asking yourself, ‘‘Okay. I un-
derstand that my depression results from my negative
thoughts because my outlook on life changes enormously
when my moods go up or down. But if my negative thoughts
are so distorted, how do I continually get fooled? I can think

48 David D. Burns, M.D.

as clearly and realistically as the next person, so if what I
am telling myself is irrational, why does it seem so right?’’

Even though your depressing thoughts may be distorted,
they nevertheless create a powerful illusion of truth. Let me
expose the basis for the deception in blunt terms—your
feelings are not facts! In fact, your feelings, per se, don’t
even count—except as a mirror of the way you are thinking.
If your perceptions make no sense, the feelings they create
will be as absurd as the images reflected in the trick mirrors
at an amusement park. But these abnormal emotions feel
just as valid and realistic as the genuine feelings created by
undistorted thoughts, so you automatically attribute truth to
them. This is why depression is such a powerful form of
mental black magic.

Once you invite depression through an ‘‘automatic’’ se-
ries of cognitive distortions, your feelings and actions will
reinforce each other in a self-perpetuating vicious cycle.
Because you believe whatever your depressed brain tells
you, you find yourself feeling negative about almost every-
thing. This reaction occurs in milliseconds, too quickly for
you even to be aware of it. The negative emotion feels
realistic and in turn lends an aura of credibility to the dis-
torted thought which created it. The cycle goes on and on,
and you are eventually trapped. The mental prison is an
illusion, a hoax you have inadvertently created, but it seems
real because it feels real.

What is the key to releasing yourself from your emotional
prison? Simply this: Your thoughts create your emotions;
therefore, your emotions cannot prove that your thoughts
are accurate. Unpleasant feelings merely indicate that you
are thinking something negative and believing it. Your emo-
tions follow your thoughts just as surely as baby ducks
follow their mother. But the fact that the baby ducks follow
faithfully along doesn’t prove that the mother knows where
she is going!

Let’s examine your equation, ‘‘I feel, therefore I am.’’
This attitude that emotions reflect a kind of self-evident,
ultimate truth is not unique to depressed people. Most psy-

FEELING GOOD 49

chotherapists today share the conviction that becoming more
aware of your feelings and expressing them more openly
represent emotional maturity. The implication is that your
feelings represent a higher reality, a personal integrity, a
truth beyond question.

My position is quite different. Your feelings, per se, are
not necessarily special at all. In fact, to the extent that your
negative emotions are based on mental distortions—as is all
too often the case—they can hardly be viewed as desirable.

Do I mean you should get rid of all emotions? Do I want
you to turn into a robot? No. I want to teach you to avoid
painful feelings based on mental distortions, because they
are neither valid nor desirable. I believe that once you have
learned how to perceive life more realistically you will ex-
perience an enhanced emotional life with a greater appre-
ciation for genuine sadness—which lacks distortion—as
well as joy.

As you go on to the next sections of this book, you can
learn to correct the distortions that fool you when you are
upset. At the same time, you will have the opportunity to
reevaluate some of the basic values and assumptions that
create your vulnerability to destructive mood swings. I have
outlined the necessary steps in detail. The modifications in
illogical thinking patterns will have a profound effect on
your moods and increase your capacity for productive living.
Now, let’s go ahead and see how we can turn your problems
around.


Part Il

Practical Applications


Chapter 4

Start by Building Self-Esteem

When you are depressed, you invariably believe that you
are worthless. The worse the depression, the more you feel
this way. You are not alone. A survey by Dr. Aaron Beck
revealed that over 80 percent of depressed patients ex-
pressed self-dislike.* Furthermore, Dr. Beck found that de-
pressed patients see themselves as deficient in the very
qualities they value most highly: intelligence, achievement,
popularity, attractiveness, health, and strength. He said a
depressed self-image can be characterized by the four D’s:
You feel Defeated, Defective, Deserted, and Deprived.
Almost all negative emotional reactions inflict their dam-
age only as a result of low self-esteem. A poor self-image
is the magnifying glass that can transform a trivial mistake
or an imperfection into an overwhelming symbol of personal
defeat. For example, Eric, a first-year law student, feels a
sense of panic in class. ‘“‘When the professor calls on me,
Pll probably goof up.’’ Although Eric’s fear of “‘goofing
up’’ was foremost on his mind, my dialogue with him re-

*Beck, Aaron T. Depression: Clinical, Experimental, & Theoretical As-
pects. New York: Hoeber, 1967. (Republished as Depression: Causes and
Treatment. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1972, pp. 17-
23.)

53

54 David D. Burns, M.D.

vealed that a sense of personal inadequacy was the real cause
of the problem:

DAVID:
ERIC:
DAVID:

ErRIc:
DAVID:

Eric:
DAVID:

ERIC:

DAVID:

ERIC:

DAVID:
ERIC:

Suppose you did goof up in class. Why would
that be particularly upsetting to you? Why is that
so tragic?

Then I would make a fool of myself.

Suppose you did make a fool of yourself. Why
would that be upsetting?

Because then everyone would look down on me.
Suppose people did look down on you? What
then?

Then I would feel miserable.

Why? Why is it that you would have to feel
miserable if people were looking down on you?
Well, that would mean I wouldn’t be a worth-
while person. Furthermore, it might ruin my ca-
reer. I’d get bad grades, and maybe I could never
be an attorney.

Suppose you didn’t become an attorney. Let’s
assume for the purposes of discussion that you
did flunk out. Why would that be particularly
upsetting to you?

That would mean that I had failed at something
I’ve wanted all my life.

And what would that mean to you?

Life would be empty. It would mean I was a
failure. It would mean I was worthless.

In this brief dialogue, Eric showed that he believed it
would be terrible to be disapproved of or to make a mistake
or to fail. He seemed convinced that if one person looked
down on him then everyone would. It was as if the word
REJECT would suddenly be stamped on his forehead for

FEELING GOOD 55

everyone to see. He seemed to have no sense of self-esteem
that was not contingent upon approval and/or success. He
measured himself by the way others looked at him and by
what he had achieved. If his cravings for approval and ac-
complishment were not satisfied, Eric sensed he would be
nothing because there would be no true support from
within.

If you feel that Eric’s perfectionistic drive for achieve-
ment and approval is self-defeating and unrealistic, you are
right. But to Eric, this drive was realistic and reasonable.
If you are now depressed or have ever been depressed, you
may find it much harder to recognize the illogical thinking
patterns which cause you to look down on yourself. In fact,
you are probably convinced that you really are inferior or
worthless. And any suggestion to the contrary is likely to
sound foolish and dishonest.

Unfortunately, when you are depressed you may not be
alone in your conviction about your personal inadequacy.
In many cases you will be so persuasive and persistent in
your maladaptive belief that you are defective and no good,
you may lead your friends, family, and even your therapist
into accepting this idea of yourself. For many years psy-
chiatrists have tended to ‘‘buy into’’ the negative self-
evaluation system of depressed individuals without probing
the validity of what the patients are saying about them-
selves. This is illustrated in the writings of such a keen
observer as Sigmund Freud in his treatise ‘‘Mourning and
Melancholia,’’ which forms the basis for the orthodox psy-
choanalytic approach to treating depression. In this classic
study Freud said that when the patient says he is worthless,
unable to achieve, and morally despicable, he must be right.
Consequently, it was fruitless for the therapist to disagree
with the patient. Freud believed the therapist should agree
that the patient is, in fact, uninteresting, unlovable, petty,
self-centered, and dishonest. These qualities describe a hu-
man being’s true self, according to Freud, and the disease
process simply makes the truth more obvious:

56 David D. Burns, M.D.

The patient represents his ego to us as worthless, in-
capable of any achievement and morally despicable;
he reproaches himself, vilifies himself and expects to
be cast out and punished. . . . It would be equally fruit-
less from a scientific and therapeutic point of view to
contradict a patient who brings these accusations
against his ego. He must surely be right in some way
[emphasis mine] and be describing something that is
as it seems to him to be. Indeed we must at once confirm
some of his statements without reservation. He really
is as lacking in interest and incapable of love and
achievement as he says [emphasis mine}... .He also
seems to us justified in certain other self-accusations;
it is merely that he has a keener eye for the truth than
other people who are not melancholic [emphasis mine}.
When in his heightened self-criticism he describes him-
self as petty, egoistic, dishonest, lacking in inde-
pendence, one whose sole aim has been to hide the
weaknesses of his own nature, it may be so far as
we know, that he has come pretty near to understand-
ing himself [emphasis mine]; we only wonder why a
man has to be ill before he can be accessible to truth
of this kind.

—SIGMUND FREUD, ‘‘Mourning and Melancholia’’*

The way a therapist handles your feelings of inadequacy
is crucial to the cure, as your sense of worthlessness is a
key to depression. The question also has considerable phil-
osophical relevance—is human nature inherently defective?
Are depressed patients actually facing the ultimate truth
about themselves? And what, in the final analysis, is the
source of genuine self-esteem? This, in my opinion, is the
most important question you will ever confront.

First, you cannot earn worth through what you do.

*Freud, S. Collected Papers, \917. (Translated by Joan Riviere, Vol. IV,
Chapter 8, *“Mourning and Melancholia,’’ pp. 155-156. London: Hogarth
Press Ltd., 1952.)

FEELING GOOD 57

Achievements can bring you Satisfaction but not happiness.
Self-worth based on accomplishments is a ‘‘pseudo-
esteem,’’ not the genuine thing! My many successful but
depressed patients would all agree. Nor can you base a valid
sense of self-worth on your looks, talent, fame, or fortune.
Marilyn Monroe, Mark Rothko, Freddie Prinz, and a mul-
titude of famous suicide victims attest to this grim truth.
Nor can love, approval, friendship, or a capacity for close,
caring human relationships add one iota to your inherent
worth. The great majority of depressed individuals are in
fact very much loved, but it doesn’t help one bit because
self-love and self-esteem are missing. At the bottom line,
only your own sense of self-worth determines how you feel.

‘*So,’’ you may now be asking with some exasperation,
*“‘how do I get a sense of self-worth? The fact is, I feel
damn inadequate, and I’m convinced I’m really not as good
as other people. I don’t believe there’s anything I can do
to change those rotten feelings because that’s the way I
basically am.’”’

One of the cardinal features of cognitive therapy is that it
stubbornly refuses to buy into your sense of worthlessness. In
my practice I lead my patients through a systematic re-
evaluation of their negative self-image. I raise the same ques-
tion over and over again: ‘‘Are you really right when you in-
sist that somewhere inside you are essentially a loser?’’

The first step is to take a close look at what you say about
yourself when you insist you are no good. The evidence
you present in defense of your worthlessness will usually,
if not always, make no sense.

This opinion is based on a recent study by Drs. Aaron
Beck and David Braff which indicated that there is actually
a formal thinking disturbance in depressed patients. De-
pressed individuals were compared with schizophrenic pa-
tients and with undepressed persons in their ability to
interpret the meaning of a number of proverbs, such as ‘‘A
stitch in time saves nine.’’ Both the schizophrenic and de-
pressed patients made many logical errors and had difficulty
in extracting the meaning of the proverbs. They were overly

58 David D. Burns, M.D.

concrete and couldn’t make accurate generalizations. Al-
though the severity of the defect was obviously less profound
and bizarre in the depressed patients than in the schizo-
phrenic group, the depressed individuals were clearly ab-
normal as compared with the normal subjects.

In practical terms the study indicated that during periods
of depression you lose some of your capacity for clear think-
ing; you have trouble putting things into proper perspective.
Negative events grow in importance until they dominate
your entire reality—and you can’t really tell that what is
happening is distorted. It all seems very real to you. The
illusion of hell you create is very convincing.

The more depressed and miserable you feel, the more
twisted your thinking becomes. And, conversely, in the
absence of mental distortion, you cannot experience low
self-worth or depression!

What types of mental errors do you make most generally
when you look down on yourself? A good place to begin
is with the list of distortions you began to master in Chapter
3. The most usual mental distortion to look out for when
you are feeling worthless is all-or-nothing thinking. If you
see life only in such extreme categories, you will believe
your performance will be either great or terrible—nothing
else will exist. As a salesman told me, “‘Achieving 95
percent or better of my goal for monthly sales is acceptable.
Ninety-four percent or below is the equivalent of total fail-
ure.”’

Not only is this all-or-nothing system of self-evaluation
highly unrealistic and self-defeating, it creates overwhelm-
ing anxiety and frequent disappointment. A depressed psy-
chiatrist who was referred to me noticed a lack of sexual
drive and a difficulty in maintaining erections during a two-
week period when he was feeling blue. His perfectionistic
tendencies had dominated not only his illustrious profes-
sional career but also his sexual life. Consequently, he had
intercourse regularly with his wife every other day precisely
on schedule for the twenty years of their married life. In
spite of his decreased sex drive—which is a common symp-

FEELING GOOD 59

tom of depression—he told himself, ‘‘I must continue to
perform intercourse on schedule.’’ This thought created
such anxiety that he became increasingly unable to achieve
a satisfactory erection. Because his perfect intercourse track
record was broken, he now began clubbing himself with the
“‘nothing’’ side of his all-or-nothing system and concluded,
‘‘[’m not a full marriage partner anymore. I’m a failure as
a husband. I’m not even a man. I’m a worthless nothing.’”’
Although he was a competent (and some might even say
brilliant) psychiatrist, he confided to me tearfully, ‘‘Dr.
Burns, you and I both know it is an undeniable fact that I
will never be able to have intercourse again.’’ In spite of
his years of medical training, he could actually convince
himself of such a thought.

Overcoming the Sense of Worthlessness

By now you might be saying, ‘“‘Okay, I can see that there
is a certain illogic which lurks behind the sense of worth-
lessness. At least for some people. But they are basically
winners; they’re not like me. You seem to be treating famous
physicians and successful businessmen. Anyone could have
told you that their lack of self-esteem was illogical. But I
really am a mediocre nothing. Others are, in fact, better
looking and more popular and successful than I am. So what
can I do about it? Nothing, that’s what! My feeling of
worthlessness is very valid. It’s based on reality, so there
is little consolation in being told to think logically. I don’t
think there’s any way to make these awful feelings go away
unless I try to fool myself, and you and I both know that
won’t work.’’ Let me first show you a couple of popular
approaches, used by many therapists, which I feel do not
represent satisfactory solutions to your problem of worth-
lessness. Then I’1] show you some approaches that will make
sense and help you.

In keeping with the belief that there is some deep truth
in your conviction you are basically worthless, some psy-

60 David D. Burns, M.D.

chotherapists may allow you to ventilate these feelings of
inadequacy during a therapy session. There is undoubtedly
some benefit to getting such feelings off your chest. The
cathartic release may sometimes, but not always, result in
a temporary mood elevation. However, if the therapist does
not provide objective feedback about the validity of your
self-evaluation, you may conclude that he agrees with you.
And you may be right! You may, in fact, have fooled him
as well as yourself! As a result you probably will feel even
more inadequate.

Prolonged silences during therapy sessions may cause you
to become more upset and preoccupied with your critical
internal voice—much like a sensory-deprivation experi-
ment. This kind of nondirective therapy, in which the ther-
apist adopts a passive role, frequently produces greater
anxiety and depression for the patient. And even when you
do feel better as a result of achieving emotional release with
an empathetic and caring therapist, the sense of improve-
ment is likely to be short-lived if you haven’t significantly
transformed the way you evaluate yourself and your life.
Unless you substantially reverse your self-defeating thinking
and behavior patterns, you are likely to slip back again into
depression.

Just as emotional ventilation for its own sake is usually
not enough to overcome the sense of worthlessness, insight
and psychological interpretation generally don’t help either.
For example, Jennifer was a writer who came for treatment
for panic she experienced before publication of her novel.
In the first session she told me, ‘‘I have been to several
therapists. They have told me that my problem is perfec-
tionism and impossible expectations and demands on my-
self. 1 also have learned that I probably picked up this trait
from my mother, who is compulsive and perfectionistic.
She can find nineteen things wrong with an incredibly clean
room. I always tried to please her, but rarely felt I succeeded
no matter how well I did. Therapists have told me, ‘Stop
seeing everyone as your mother! Stop being so perfection-

FEELING GOOD 6]

istic.” But how do I do this? Id like to, I want to, but no
one ever was able to tell me how to go about it.’’

Jennifer’s complaint is one I hear nearly every day in my
practice. Pinpointing the nature or origin of your problem
may give you insight, but usually fails to change the way
you act. That is not surprising. You have been practicing
for years and years the bad mental habits that helped create
your low self-esteem. It will take systematic and ongoing
effort to turn the problem around. Does a stutterer stop
stuttering because of his insight into the fact that he doesn’t
vocalize properly? Does a tennis player’s game improve just
because the coach tells him he hits the ball into the net too
often?

Since ventilation of emotions and insight—the two staples
of the standard psychotherapeutic diet—won’t help, what
will? As a cognitive therapist, I have three aims in dealing
with your sense of worthlessness: a rapid and decisive trans-
formation in the way you think, feel, and behave. These
results will be brought about in a systematic training pro-
gram that employs simple concrete methods you can apply
on a daily basis. If you are willing to commit some regular
time and effort to this program, you can expect success
proportionate to the effort you put in.

Are you willing? If so, we’ve come to the beginning.
You’re about to take the first crucial step toward an im-
proved mood and self-image.

I have developed many specific and easily applied tech-
niques that can help you develop your sense of worth. As
you read the following sections, keep in mind that simply
reading them is not guaranteed to bolster your self-esteem—
at least not for long. You will have to work at it and practice
the various exercises. In fact, I recommend that you set
some time aside each day to work at improving your self-
image because only in this way can you experience the
fastest and most enduring personal growth.

62 David D. Burns, M.D.

Specific Methods for Boosting Self-Esteem

1. Talk Back to That Internal Critic! A sense of worth-
lessness is created by your internal self-critical dialogue. It
is self-degrading statements, such as ‘‘I’m no damn good,”’
‘*[’m a shit,’’ ‘‘I’m inferior to other people,’’ and so on,
that create and feed your feelings of despair and poor self-
esteem. In order to overcome this bad mental habit, three
steps are necessary:

a. Train yourself to recognize and write down the self-

critical thoughts as they go through your mind;

b. Learn why these thoughts are distorted; and

c. Practice talking back to them so as to develop a more

realistic self-evaluation system.

One effective method for accomplishing this is the ‘‘tri-
ple-column technique.’’ Simply draw two lines down the
center of a piece of paper to divide it into thirds (see Figure
4—1, page 63). Label the left-hand column ‘‘ Automatic
Thoughts (Self-Criticism),’’ the middle column ‘‘Cognitive
Distortion,’’ and the right-hand column ‘‘Rational Response
(Self-Defense).’’ In the left-hand column write down all
those hurtful self-criticisms you make when you are feeling
worthless and down on yourself.

Suppose, for example, you suddenly realize you’re late
for an important meeting. Your heart sinks and you’re
gripped with panic. Now ask yourself, ‘‘What thoughts are
going through my mind right now? What am I saying to
myself? Why is this upsetting me?’’ Then write these
thoughts down in the left-hand column.

You might have been thinking, “‘I never do anything
right,’’ and “‘I’m always late.’’ Write these thoughts down
in the left-hand column and number them (see Figure 4—1).
You might also have thought, ‘‘Everyone will look down
at me. This shows what a jerk I am.’’ Just as fast as these
thoughts cross your mind, jot them down. Why? Because
they are the very cause of your emotional upset. They rip
away at you like knives tearing into your flesh. I’m sure
you know what I mean because you’ ve felt it.

"SOUINOUIOS 93] SI DUOAIDAT “[OOJ B
SUI SYLUI },USSOP SITY Inq ‘a}e] UI DUIOD | JI YSIPOOY JOH9 Id]{9} 9UNIIO,
Jeodde Aeul | “JOYI , JOO} B,, JOU WT ‘ONIG ‘Ss surpoqe’y ° "Jl@SAUL JO JOO} B SxCUI [LJ “S

.¢ lof &,, JOU U,J ‘MOU ‘UO sUIO7) “p SuI[Oqe’] * "we J Ylof B yeYM SMOUS SIL “p

JOO Id][9} 9uNjI0-]
‘OUIT] UO We}S OAD }, WOM SUTUI) SUTWJOU-10-[[V
SUTSOU SY) SGARJA] “‘P[JOM 9} JO pus oy) 40U S31 UONLZILIDUISIOAO
nq dj] WJ Jeu) poyuroddesrp aq Aew sUODUIOS *¢ SUIPeal pul ° “OUI UO UMOP YOO] [JIM sUOAIOAT *¢

‘Temound aiow! Bulag 10} poujour ve dojaasp

pue wo[qoid sty} uo Yiom IL] ‘OA Pl ue
UdJJO SIOU JL] W,] JI “OWN UO Udeq 9A] SOW) OW
[[@ JO YUIYL “SNO[NIIpU s Jey] aye] SXoMJD JOU We *Z UONLZYIOUISIOAO * ‘yey SABA UL] °Z

‘JUS sSUT} JO IO] & OP | jasuasUON *] UONCZYLIOUISIOAO ° ‘WYysu SumjAue OP IOADU [ ‘|

(ASNAAAC-ATAS) (WSIDLLINO-ATAS)

asuodsay jououpy

UONAOISIG, aA1uso7y

jysnoy | I1jDuoInY

"S1ND00 JUeAS aAT}eHou e UBUM PUIW INOA poo} Ajjyeoewojne jeu} SWSIONUO
-JJas Ysrey ‘peoiGo|! ayy 10) spyBnou} jeuowes BAQos[qo es0wW ajnysqns 0} s! Wie ey, ‘Aem ewos ul dn pejoob eeu
noA UsyM JJesunoA jnoge yuIUY NOA Aem ey} eunjonsjse1 0} pesn eq ued ,eNnbiuyoe} ULUNJOO-9IdiN1,, eu, “L—p e4anBi4


64 David D. Burns, M.D.

What’s the second step? You already began to prepare
for this when you read Chapter 3. Using the list of ten
cognitive distortions (page 42), see if you can identify the
thinking errors in each of your negative automatic thoughts.
For instance, “‘I never do anything right’’ is an example of
overgeneralization. Write this down in the middle column.
Continue to pinpoint the distortions in your other automatic
thoughts, as shown in Figure 4—1.

You are now ready for the crucial step in mood trans-
formation—substituting a more rational, less upsetting
thought in the nght-hand column. You do not try to cheer
yourself up by rationalizing or saying things you do not
believe are objectively valid. Instead, try to recognize the
truth. If what you write down in the Rational Response
column is not convincing and realistic, it won’t help you
one bit. Make sure you believe in your rebuttal to self-
criticism. This rational response can take into account what
was illogical and erroneous about your self-critical auto-
matic thought.

For example, in answer to “‘I never do anything right,”’
you could write, ‘Forget that! I do some things right and
some wrong, just like everyone else. I fouled up on my
appointment, but let’s not blow this up out of proportion. ”’

Suppose you cannot think of a rational response to a
particular negative thought. Then just forget about it for a
few days and come back to it later. You will usually be
able to see the other side of the coin. As you work at the
triple-column technique for fifteen minutes every day over
a period of a month or two, you will find it gets easier and
easier. Don’t be afraid to ask other people how they would
answer an upsetting thought if you can’t figure out the ap-
propriate rational response on your own.

One note of caution: Do not use words describing your
emotional reactions in the Automatic Thought column. Just
write the thoughts that created the emotion. For example,
suppose you notice your car has a flat tire. Don’t write °‘I
feel crappy’’ because you can’t disprove that with a rational

FEELING GOOD 65

response. The fact is, you do feel crappy. Instead, write
down the thoughts that automatically flashed through your
mind the moment you saw the tire; for example, ‘‘I’m so
stupid—I should have gotten a new tire this last month,”’
or ‘‘Oh, hell! This is just my rotten luck!’’ Then you can
substitute rational responses such as “‘It might have been
better to get a new tire, but I’m not stupid and no one can
predict the future with. certainty.’’ This process won’t put
air in the tire, but at least you won’t have to change it with
a deflated ego.

While it’s best not to describe your emotions in the Au-
tomatic Thought column, it can be quite helpful to do some
‘emotional accounting’’ before and after you use the triple-
column technique to determine how much your feelings
actually improve. You can do this very easily if you record
how upset you are between 0 and 100 percent before you
pinpoint and answer your automatic thoughts. In the pre-
vious example, you might note that you were 80 percent
frustrated and angry at the moment you saw the flat tire.
Then, once you complete the written exercise, you can
record how much relief you experienced, say, to 40 percent
or so. If there’s a decrease, you'll know that the method
has worked for you.

A slightly more elaborate form developed by Dr. Aaron
Beck called the Daily Record of Dysfunctional Thoughts
allows you to record not only your upsetting thoughts but
also your feelings and the negative event that triggered them
(see Figure 4-2, page 66).

For example, suppose you are Selling insurance and a
potential customer insults you without provocation and
hangs up on you. Describe the actual event in the Situation
column, but not in the Automatic Thought(s) column. Then
write down your feelings and the negative distorted thoughts
that created them in the appropriate column. Finally, talk
back to these thoughts and do your emotional accounting.
Some individuals prefer to use the Daily Record of Dys-
functional Thoughts because it allows them to analyze neg-

%O1 ‘pes
OG ‘Assuy

*%001

—Q ‘suo

-ows yuonb

-OSQNs VJ

pue Ajioads
IUOIING

{i}! woMs

AYM OS ‘JoWOIsSNd
mau 8 yovoidde Aye
-nsn | ABm ou} WOdj
woalypip ZuryyAue
Op 1,UpIp Aqjenioe |
ZW 0} 398 Sty} 19]
AUN ‘SOUIIy ye Op
He eA, “ING 9U} UI
uled B Oyl] pojoe ay
"sarod

JO 10] & pos 9A,]

(S)asuodsay
jouo1uwvy

‘(s)sy8nou) oneW
-OWNE Jy 0} (s)asuods
“OJ [BUOTIEL SILIAA

von
-ezijeuosJod
‘SUOISN|IUOD
o} suidunr ‘¢

suTpaqe|

‘UONBOYIUsePAY °Z
uOIeZ

-[[BIQUIBIOAQ "|

"Wysnoy)
oyewoNe YyoRA ut
yuosaid (s)uonI0)
“sip oun Aynuapy
(S)uOINOISIG
aayiusoy

“Bury
BUOIM dU) ples
DARBY ISNU | “¢

"pieyseqg

ay) o]8uess

0} ON P.F
‘Kayod

B ]JOS JOAOU [JJ |

"(s)uoNOWS
ayy Auedwiosoe jeu)

(s)ysnoy; sew
-OyNE SY) SIA
(s)rysnoy |
INoWOoNy

"yoog “L uoley ‘616] 148uAdoD,,
"ajqissod ssuajul ysow 94} = QOL ‘908 B = | ‘UONOUWA Jo saIZop Sunes uy ‘UOTOWID oY) YIM payeloosse
YSNOY! MeWOME dy) s10U ‘USY], “I SeNUINs 07 PouIdES Jey] UOHENIS oy) d}OU ‘UOTOUID JURSes|duN Ue ddUdLIAdKS NOK UOYAA :UOLeURIdxg

BOS “Pes

%66 ‘Aisuy

“%001-1
‘UOTJOUID Jo
Id1FOP IBY °Z
‘ajo ‘Arsue
/snorxue
spes Ajisadgs *|
(sjuonowy

. ey Wep
-pod AW Jo }no
19D,, ‘ples oH

wesJzoid a9ue
-JNSUL MOU INO
aquasap 0} []2d
] uaym aw uO
dn suey 10u10}
-SNO EIUIIOd

‘uOT]OWd

yueseajdun

94) 0} SuIped|

JUDAS [ENjOV 91)

oquosap AyoLg
uoyonns

wsyuBnouL yeuonounssAq jo psoooey Ajreq ‘g-—~ aunbi4

FEELING GOOD 67

ative events, thoughts, and feelings in a systematic way.
Be sure to use the technique that feels most comfortable to
you.

Writing down your negative thoughts and rational re-
sponses may strike you as simplistic, ineffective, or even
gimmicky. You might even share the feelings of some pa-
tients who initially refused to do this, saying, ‘‘What’s the
point? It won’t work—1it couldn’t work because I really am
hopeless and worthless. ’’

This attitude can only serve as a self-fulfilling prophecy. If
you are unwilling to pick up the tool and use it, you won’t be
able to do the job. Start by writing down your automatic
thoughts and rational responses for fifteen minutes every
day for two weeks and see the effect this has on your mood,
as measured by the Burns Depression Checklist. You may
be surprised to note the beginning of a period of personal
growth and a healthy change in your self-image.

This was the experience of Gail, a young secretary whose
sense of self-esteem was so low that she felt in constant
danger of being criticized by friends. She was so sensitive
to her roommate’s request to help clean up their apartment
after a party that she felt rejected and worthless. She was
initially so pessimistic about her chances for feeling better
that I could barely persuade her to give the triple-column
technique a try. When she reluctantly decided to try it, she
was surprised to see how her self-esteem and mood began
to undergo a rapid transformation. She reported that writing
down the many negative thoughts that flowed through her
mind during the day helped her gain objectivity. She stopped
taking these thoughts so seriously. As a result of Gail’s
daily written exercises, she began to feel better, and her
interpersonal relationships improved by a quantum leap. An
excerpt from her written homework is included in Figure
4-3.

Gail’s experience is not unusual. The simple exercise of
answering your negative thoughts with rational responses
on a daily basis is at the heart of the cognitive method. It
is one of the most important approaches to changing your

Figure 4—3. Excerpts from Gail’s daily written homework using
the “triple-column technique.” In the left column she recorded the
negative thoughts that automatically flowed through her mind
when her roommate asked her to clean up the apartment. In the
middle column she identified her distortions, and in the right- hand
column she wrote down more realistic interpretations. This daily
written exercise greatly accelerated her personal growth and re-
sulted in substantial emotional relief.

Automatic
Thoughts
(SELF-CRITICISM)

1. Everyone
knows how dis-
organized and
selfish I am.

2. I’m completely
self-centered
and thoughtless.
I’m just no
good.

3. My roommate
probably hates
me. I have no
real friends.

Cognitive
Distortion

Jumping to
conclusions
(mind reading);
overgeneraliza-
tion

All-or-nothing
thinking

Jumping to
conclusions
(mind reading);
all-or-nothing
thinking

Rational Response

(SELF-DEFENSE)

1. I’m disorganized at

times and I’m or-
ganized at times.
Everybody doesn’t
think the same way
about me.

. Pm thoughtless at

times, and at times
I can be quite
thoughtful. I prob-
ably do act overly
self-centered at
times. I can work
on this. I may be
imperfect but [I’m
not “‘no good!”’

. My friendships are

just as real as any-
one’s. At times I
take criticism as re-
jection of me, Gail,
the person. But oth-
ers are usually
not rejecting me.
They’re just ex-
pressing dislike for
what I did (or
said)—-and _ they
still accept me af-
terward.

FEELING GOOD 69

thinking. It is crucial to write down your automatic thoughts
and rational responses; do not try to do the exercise in your
head. Writing them down forces you to develop much more
objectivity than you could ever achieve by letting responses
swirl through your mind. It also helps you locate the mental
errors that depress you. The triple-column technique is not
limited to problems of personal inadequacy, but can be
applied to a great range of emotional difficulties in which
distorted thinking plays a central role. You can take the
major sting out of problems you would ordinarily assume
are entirely ‘‘realistic,’’ such as bankruptcy, divorce, or
severe mental illness. Finally, in the section on prophylaxis
and personal growth, you will learn how to apply a slight
variation of the aufomatic-thought \method to penetrate to
the part of your psyche where the causes of mood swings
lurk. You will be able to expose and transform those “*pres-
sure points’’ in your mind that cause you to be vulnerable
to depression in the first place.

2. Mental Biofeedback. A second method which can be
very useful involves monitoring your negative thoughts with
a wrist counter. You can buy one at a sporting-goods store
or a golf shop; it looks like a wristwatch, is inexpensive,
and every time you push the button, the number changes
on the dial. Click the button each time a negative thought
about yourself crosses your mind; be on the constant alert
for such thoughts. At the end of the day, note your daily
total score and write it down in a log book.

At first you will notice that the number increases; this
will continue for several days as you get better and better
at identifying your critical thoughts. Soon you will begin
to notice that the daily total reaches a plateau for a week
to ten days, and then it will begin to go down. This indicates
that your harmful thoughts are diminishing and that you are
getting better. This approach usually requires three weeks.

It is not known with certainty why such a simple technique
works so well, but systematic self-monitoring frequently
helps develop increased self-control. As you learn to stop

70. David D. Burns, M.D.

haranguing yourself, you will begin to feel much better.

In case you decide to use a wrist counter, I want to
emphasize it is not intended to be a substitute for setting
aside ten to fifteen minutes each day to write down your
distorted negative thoughts and answering them as outlined
in the previous pages. The written method cannot be by-
passed because it exposes to the light of day the illogical
nature of the thoughts that trouble you. Once you are doing
this regularly, you can then use your wrist counter to nip
your painful cognitions in the bud at other times.

3. Cope, Don’t Mope-—The Woman Who Thought
She Was a “Bad Mother.“ As you read the previous sec-
tions, the following objection may have occurred to you:
‘‘All this deals with is my thoughts. But what if my problems
are realistic? What good will it do me to think differently?
I have some real inadequacies that need to be dealt with.’”’

Nancy is a thirty-four-year-old mother of two who felt
this way. Six years ago she divorced her first husband and
has just recently remarried. She is completing her college
degree on a part-time basis. Nancy is usually animated and
enthusiastic and quite committed to her family. However,
she has experienced episodic depressions for many years.
During those low periods she becomes extremely critical of
herself and others, and expresses self-doubt and insecurity.
She was referred to me during such a period of depression.

I was struck by the vehemence of her self-reproach. She
had received a note from her son’s teacher stating that he
was having some difficulty in school. Her immediate re-
action was to mope and blame herself. The following is an
excerpt from our therapy session:

Nancy: I should have worked with Bobby on his home-
work because now he is disorganized and not
ready for school. I spoke to Bobby’s teacher,
who said Bobby lacks self-confidence and
doesn’t follow directions adequately. Conse-
quently, his schoolwork has been deteriorating.

FEELING GOOD 71

I had a number of self-critical thoughts after the
call and I felt suddenly dejected. I began to tell
myself that a good mother spends time with her
kids on some activity every night. I’m respon-
sible for his poor behavior—lying, not doing
well in school. I just can’t figure out how to
handle him. I’m really a bad mother. I began to
think he was stupid and about to flunk and how
it was all my fault.

My first strategy was to teach her how to attack the state-
ment ‘‘I am a bad mother,’’ because I felt this self-criticism
was hurtful and unrealistic, creating a paralyzing internal
anguish which would not help her in her efforts to guide
Bobby through his crisis.

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

Okay. What’s wrong with this statement, ‘“I am
a bad mother’’?

Well...

Is there any such thing as a ‘“‘bad mother’’?
Of course.

What is your definition of a ‘‘bad mother’’?

A bad mother is one who does a bad job of
raising her kids. She isn’t as effective as other
mothers, so her kids turn out bad. It seems ob-
vious.

So you would say a ‘‘bad mother’’ is one who
is low on mothering skills? That’s your defini-
tion?

Some mothers lack mothering skills.

But all mothers lack mothering skills to some
extent.

They do?

There’s no mother in this world who 1s perfect
in all mothering skills. So they all lack moth-

72 David D. Burns, M.D.

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

ering skills in some part. According to your
definition, it would seem that all mothers are
bad mothers.

I feel that /’m a bad mother, but not everybody
is.

Well, define it again. What is a ‘“‘bad mother’’?

A bad mother is someone who does not under-
stand her children or is constantly making dam-
aging errors. Errors that are detrimental.

According to this new definition, you’re not a
‘‘bad mother,’’ and there are no ‘‘bad mothers”’
because no one constantly makes damaging er-
rors.

No one... ?

You said that a bad mother constantly makes
damaging errors. There is no such person who
constantly makes damaging errors twenty-four
hours a day. Every mother is capable of doing
some things right.

Well, there can be abusive parents who are al-
ways punishing, hitting—you read about them
in the papers. Their children end up battered.
That could certainly be a bad mother.

There are parents who resort to abusive behav-
ior, that’s true. And these individuals could im-
prove their behavior, which might make them
feel better about themselves and their children.
But it’s not realistic to say that such parents are
constantly doing abusing or damaging things,
and it’s not going to help matters by attaching
the label ‘‘bad’’ to them. Such individuals do
have a problem with aggression and need train-
ing in self-control, but it would only make mat-
ters worse if you tried to convince them that

FEELING GOOD 73

their problem was badness. They usually already
believe they are rotten human beings, and that
is part of their problem. Labeling them as ‘‘bad
mothers’’ would be inaccurate, and it would also
be irresponsible, like trying to put out a fire by
throwing gasoline on it.

At this point I was trying to show Nancy that she was
just defeating herself by labeling herself as a ‘‘bad mother.”’
I hoped to show her that no matter how she defined ‘‘bad
mother,’’ the definition would be unrealistic. Once she gave
up the destructive tendency to mope and label herself as

worthless,

we could then go on to coping strategies for

helping her son with his problems at school.

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

But I still have the feeling I am a ‘bad mother. ”’
Well, once again, what is your definition?

Someone who doesn’t give her child enough
attention, positive attention. I’m so busy in
school. And when I do pay attention, I’m afraid
it may be all negative attention. Who knows?
That’s what I’m saying.

A ‘‘bad mother’’ is one who doesn’t give her
child enough attention, you say? Enough for
what?

For her child to do well in life.

Do well in everything, or in some things?

In some things. No one can do well at every-
thing.

Does Bobby do well at some things? Does he
have any redeeming virtues?

Oh yes. There are many things he enjoys and
does well at.
Then you can’t be a ‘‘bad mother’’ according
to your definition because your son does well at
many things.

NANCY:

DAvID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

74 David D. Burns, M.D.

Then why do I feel like a bad mother?

It seems that you’re labeling yourself as a ‘‘bad
mother’’ because you’d like to spend more time
with your son, and because you sometimes feel
inadequate, and because there is a clear-cut need
to improve your communication with Bobby.
But it won’t help you solve these problems if
you conclude automatically you are a ‘“‘bad
mother.’’ Does that make sense to you?

If I paid more attention to him and gave him
more help, he could do better at school and he
could be a whole lot happier. I feel it’s my fault
when he doesn’t do well.

So you are willing to take the blame for his
mistakes?
Yes, it’s my fault. So I’m a bad mother.

And you also take the credit for his achieve-
ments? And for his happiness?

No—he should get the credit for that, not me.
Does that make sense? That you’re responsible
for his faults but not his strengths?

No.

Do you understand the point I’m trying to make?
Yep.

‘*Bad mother’’ is an abstraction; there 1s no such
thing as a ‘‘bad mother’’ in this universe.
Right. But mothers can do bad things.

They’re just people, and people do a whole va-
riety of things—good, bad, and neutral. ““Bad
mother’’ is just a fantasy; there’s no such thing.
The chair is a thing. A ‘“‘bad mother’’ is an
abstraction. You understand that?

I got it, but some mothers are more experienced
and more effective than others.

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

DAVID:

NANCY:

FEELING GOOD 75

Yes, there are all degrees of effectiveness at
parenting skills. And most everyone has plenty
of room for improvement. The meaningful ques-
tion is not “‘Am I a good or bad mother?’’ but
rather ‘“What are my relative skills and weak-
nesses, and what can I do to improve?”’

I understand. That approach makes more sense
and it feels much better. When I label myself
‘‘bad mother,’’ I just feel inadequate and de-
pressed, and I don’t do anything productive.
Now I see what you’ve been driving at. Once I
give up criticizing myself, I'll feel better, and
maybe I can be more helpful to Bobby.

Right! So when you look at it that way, you’re
talking about coping strategies. For example,
what are your parenting skills? How can you
begin to improve on those skills? Now that’s the
type of thing I would suggest with regard to
Bobby. Seeing yourself as a ‘“‘bad mother’’ eats
up emotional energy and distracts you from the
task of improving your mothering skills. It’s
irresponsible.

Right. If I can stop punishing myself with that
statement, [ll be much better off and I can start
working toward helping Bobby. The moment I
stop calling myself a bad mother, I'll start feel-
ing better.

Yes, now what can you say to yourself when
you have the urge to say ‘‘I’m a bad mother’’?

I can say I don’t have to hate my whole self if
there is a particular thing I find I dislike about
Bobby, or if he has a problem at school. I can
try to define that problem, and attack that prob-
lem, and work toward solving it.

76 David D. Burns, M.D.

Davip: Right. Now, that’s a positive approach. I like
it. You refute the negative statement and then
add a positive statement. I like that.

We then worked on answering several ‘“‘automatic
thoughts’’ she had written down after the call from Bobby’s
teacher (see Figure 4—4, below). As Nancy learned to refute
her self-critical thoughts, she experienced much-needed
emotional relief. She was then able to develop some specific
coping strategies designed to help Bobby with his difficul-
ties.

Figure 4—4. Nancy’s written homework concerning Bobby’s diffi-
culties at school. This is similar to the “triple-column technique,”
except that she did not find it necessary to write down the cognitive
distortions contained in her automatic thoughts.

Automatic Thought Rational Response
(SELF-CRITICISM) (SELF-DEFENSE)

1. I didn’t pay attention to 1. I really spend too much
Bobby. time with him; I’m over-
protective.

2. I should have worked with 2. Homework is his respon-
him on his homework, and sibility, not mine. I can ex-
now he is disorganized and plain to him how to get
not ready for school. organized. What are my re-

sponsibilities?

a. Check homework;

b. Insist it be done at a cer-
tain time;

c. Ask if he’s having any
difficulties;

d. Set up a reward system.

3. A good mother spends time 3. Not true. [spend time when
with her kids on some ac- I can and want to, but it
tivity every night. isn’t feasible always. Be-

sides, his schedule is his.

4. ’mresponsible for his poor 4. Ican only guide Bobby. It’s
behavior and not doing well up to him to do the rest.
in school.

Automatic Thought Rational Response
(SELF-CRITICISM) (SELF-DEFENSE)

| 5. He wouldn’t have gotten 5. That is not so. Problems

Figure 4—4. cont.

into trouble at school if I
had helped him. If I had su-
pervised his homework ear-
lier, this problem wouldn’t
have occurred.

6. I'm a bad mother. I’m the
cause of his problems.

7. All other mothers work
with their kids, but I don’t
know how to get along with

. [’'m not a bad mother; IJ try. |

. Overgeneralization! Not

FEELING GOOD 77

will occur even if I’m
around to oversee things.

I can’t control what goes on
in all areas of his life. |
Maybe I can talk to him and
his teacher and find out how
to help him. Why punish
myself whenever someone
I love has a problem?

true. Stop moping and start
coping.

Bobby.

The first step of her coping plan was to talk to Bobby
about the difficulties he had been having so as to find out
what the real problem was. Was he having difficulties as
his teacher had suggested? What was his understanding of
the problem? Was it true that he was feeling tense and low
in confidence? Had his homework been particularly hard for
him recently? Once Nancy had obtained this information
and defined the real problem, she realized she would then
be in a position to work toward an appropriate solution. For
example, if Bobby said he found some of his courses par-
ticularly difficult, she could develop a reward system at
home to encourage him to do extra homework. She also

78 David D. Burns, M.D.

decided to read several books on parenting skills. Her re-
lationship with Bobby improved, and his grades and be-
havior at school underwent a rapid turnabout.

Nancy’s mistake had been to view herself in a global
way, making the moralistic judgment that she was a bad
mother. This type of criticism incapacitated her because it
created the impression that she had a personal problem so
big and bad that no one could do anything about it. The
emotional upset this labeling caused prevented her from
defining the real problem, breaking it down into its specific
parts, and applying appropriate solutions. If she had con-
tinued to mope, there was the distinct possibility that Bobby
would have continued to do poorly, and she would have
become increasingly ineffectual.

How can you apply what Nancy learned to your own
situation? When you are down on yourself, you might find
it helpful to ask what you actually mean when you try to
define your true identity with a negative label such as ‘‘a
fool,’’ ‘‘a sham,’’ ‘‘a stupid dope,’’ etc. Once you begin
to pick these destructive labels apart, you will find they are
arbitrary and meaningless. They actually cloud the issue,
creating confusion and despair. Once rid of them, you can
define and cope with any real problems that exist.

Summary. When you are experiencing a blue mood, the
chances are that you are telling yourself you are inherently
inadequate or just plain “‘no good.’’ You will become con-
vinced that you have a bad core or are essentially worthless.
To the extent that you believe such thoughts, you will ex-
perience a severe emotional reaction of despair and self-
hatred. You may even feel that you’d be better off dead
because you are so unbearably uncomfortable and self-
denigrating. You may become inactive and paralyzed, afraid
and unwilling to participate in the normal flow of life.

Because of the negative emotional and behavioral con-
sequences of your harsh thinking, the first step is to stop
telling yourself you are worthless. However, you probably
won’t be able to do this until you become absolutely con-

FEELING GOOD 79

vinced that these statements are incorrect and unrealistic.

How can this be accomplished? You must first consider
that a human life is an ongoing process that involves a
constantly changing physical body as well as an enormous
number of rapidly changing thoughts, feelings, and behav-
iors. Your life therefore is an evolving experience, a con-
tiual flow. You are not a thing; that’s why any label is
constricting, highly inaccurate, and global. Abstract labels
such as ‘‘worthless’’ or ‘‘inferior’’ communicate nothing
and mean nothing.

But you may still be convinced you are second-rate. What
is your evidence? You may reason, “I feel inadequate.
Therefore, I must be inadequate. Otherwise, why would I
be filled with such unbearable emotions?’’ Your error is in
emotional reasoning. Your feelings do not determine your
worth, simply your relative state of comfort or discomfort.
Rotten, miserable internal states do not prove that you are
a rotten, worthless person, merely that you think you are;
because you are in a temporarily depressed mood, you are
thinking illogically and unreasonably about yourself.

Would you say that states of mood elevation and hap-
piness prove you are great or especially worthy? Or do they
simply mean that you are feeling good?

Just as your feelings do not determine your worth, neither
do your thoughts or behaviors. Some may be positive, cre-
ative, and enhancing; the great majority are neutral. Others
may be irrational, self-defeating, and maladaptive. These
can be modified if you are willing to exert the effort, but
they certainly do not and cannot mean that you are no good.
There is no such thing in this universe as a worthless human
being.

‘‘Then how can I develop a sense of self-esteem?’’ you
may ask. The answer is—you don’t have to! You don’t have
to do anything especially worthy to create or deserve self-
esteem; all you have to do is turn off that critical, ha-
ranguing, inner voice. Why? Because that critical inner
voice is wrong! Your internal self-abuse springs from il-

80 David D. Burns, M.D.

logical, distorted thinking. Your sense of worthlessness is
not based on truth, it is just the abscess which lies at the
core of depressive illness.

So remember three crucial steps when you dre upset:

1. Zero in on those automatic negative thoughts and write
them down. Don’t let them buzz around in your head;
snare them on paper!

2. Read over the list of ten cognitive distortions. Learn
precisely how you are twisting things and blowing
them out of proportion.

3. Substitute a more objective thought that puts the lie
to the one which made you look down on yourself.
As you do this, you’ll begin to feel better. You’ ll be
boosting your self-esteem, and your sense of worth-
lessness (and, of course, your depression) will dis-
appear.

Chapter 5

Do-Nothingism: How to Beat It

In the last chapter you learned that you can change your
mood by changing how you think. There is a second major
approach to mood elevation that is enormously effective.
People are not only thinkers, they are doers, so it is not
surprising that you can substantially change the way you
feel by changing the way you act. There’s only one hitch—
when you’re depressed, you don’t feel like doing much.

One of the most destructive aspects of depression is the
way it paralyzes your willpower. In its mildest form you
may simply procrastinate about doing a few odious chores.
As your lack of motivation intensifies, virtually any activity
appears so difficult that you become overwhelmed by the
urge to do nothing. Because you accomplish very little, you
feel worse and worse. Not only do you cut yourself off from
your normal sources of stimulation and pleasure, but your
lack of productivity aggravates your self-hatred, resulting
in further isolation and incapacitation.

If you don’t recognize the emotional prison in which you
are trapped, this situation can go on for weeks, months, or
even years. Your inactivity will be all the more frustrating
if you once took pride in the energy you had for life. Your
do-nothingism can also affect your family and friends, who,
like yourself, cannot understand your behavior. They may

81

82 David D. Burns, M.D.

say that you must want to be depressed or else you’d ‘“‘get
off your behind.’? Such a comment only worsens your an-
guish and paralysis.

Do-nothingism represents one of the great paradoxes of
human nature. Some people naturally throw themselves into
life with great zest, while others always hang back, defeating
themselves at every turn as if they were involved in a plot
against themselves. Do you ever wonder why’

If a person were condemned to spend months in isolation,
cut off from all normal activities and interpersonal rela-
tionships, a substantial depression would result. Even young
monkeys slip into a retarded, withdrawn state if they are
separated from their peers and confined to a small cage.
Why do you voluntarily impose a similar punishment on
yourself? Do you want to suffer? Using cognitive tech-
niques, you can discover the precise reasons for your dif-
ficulties in motivating yourself.

In my practice I find that the great majority of the de-
pressed patients referred to me improve substantially if they
try to help themselves. Sometimes it hardly seems to matter
what you do as long as you do something with the attitude
of self-help. 1 know of two presumably ‘“hopeless’’ cases
who were helped enormously simply by putting a mark on
a piece of paper. One patient was an artist who had been
convinced for years that he couldn’t even draw a straight
line. Consequently he didn’t even try to draw. When his
therapist suggested he test his conviction by actually at-
tempting to draw a line, it came out so straight he began
drawing again and soon was symptom-free! And yet many
depressed individuals will go through a phase in which they
stubbornly refuse to do anything to help themselves. The
moment this crucial motivational problem has been solved,
the depression typically begins to diminish. You can there-
fore understand why much of our research has been directed
to locating the causes of this paralysis of the will. Using
this knowledge, we have developed some specific methods
to help you deal with procrastination.

Let me describe two perplexing patients I treated recently.

FEELING GOOD 83

You might think their do-nothingism is extreme and
wrongly conclude they must be “‘crazies’’ with whom you
would have little in common. In fact, I believe their prob-
lems are caused by attitudes similar to yours, so don’t write
them off.

Patient A, a twenty-eight-year-old woman, has done an
experiment to see how her mood would respond to a variety
of activities. It turns out that she feels substantially better
when she does nearly anything. The list of things that will
reliably give her a mood lift includes cleaning the house,
playing tennis, going to work, practicing her guitar, shop-
ping for dinner, etc. Only one thing makes her feel reliably
worse; this single activity nearly always makes her in-
tensely miserable. Can you guess what it is? DO-
NOTHINGISM: lying around in bed all day long, staring
at the ceiling and courting negative thoughts. And guess
what she does weekends. Right! She crawls right into bed
on Saturday morning and begins her descent into inner hell.
Do you think she really wants to suffer?

Patient B, a physician, gives me a clear, definite message
early in her therapy. She says she understands that the
speed of improvement is dependent on her willingness to
work between sessions, and insists she wants to get well
more than anything else in the world, having been wracked
by depression for over sixteen years. She emphasizes she’ ll
be happy to come to therapy sessions, but I must not ask
her to lift one finger to help herself. She says that if I push
her to spend five minutes on self-help assignments, she’ll
kill herself. As she describes in detail the lethal, gruesome
method of self-destruction she had carefully planned in her
hospital’s operating room, it becomes obvious that she is
deadly serious. Why is she so determined not to help her-
self?

I know your procrastination is probably less severe and
only deals with minor things, like paying bills, a trip to the
dentist, etc. Or maybe you’ve had trouble finishing a rela-
tively straightforward report that is crucial to your career.
But the perplexing question is the same—why do we fre-
quently behave in ways that are not in our self-interest?

84 David D. Burns, M.D.

Procrastinating and self-defeating behavior can seem
funny, frustrating, puzzling, infuriating, or pathetic, de-
pending on your perspective. I find it a very human
trait, so widespread that we all bump into it nearly every
day. Writers, philosophers, and students of human nature
throughout history have tried to formulate some explanation
for self-defeating behavior, including such popular theories
as:

1. You’re basically lazy; it’s just your ‘‘nature.’’

2. You want to hurt yourself and suffer. You either like
feeling depressed, or you have a self-destructive drive,
a “‘death wish.”’

3. You’re passive-aggressive, and you want to frustrate
the people around you by doing nothing.

4. You must be getting some ‘‘payoff’’ from your pro-
crastination and do-nothingism. For example, you en-
joy getting all that attention when you are depressed.

Each of these famous explanations represents a different
psychological theory, and each is inaccurate! The first is a
““trait’? model; your inactivity is seen as a fixed personality
trait and stems from your ‘‘lazy streak.’’ The problem with
this theory is that it just labels the problem without explain-
ing it. Labeling yourself as “‘lazy’’ is useless and self-
defeating because it creates the false impression that your
lack of motivation is an irreversible, innate part of your
makeup. This kind of thinking does not represent a valid
scientific theory, but is an example of a cognitive distortion
(labeling).

The second model implies you want to hurt yourself and
suffer because there is something enjoyable or desirable
about procrastination. This theory is so ludicrous I hesitate
to include it, except that it is widespread and vigorously
supported by a substantial percentage of psychotherapists.
If you have the hunch that you or someone else likes being
depressed and doing nothing, then remind yourself that

FEELING GOOD 85

depression is the most agonizing form of human suffering.
Tell me—what is so great about it? I haven’t yet met a
patient who really enjoys the misery.

If you aren’t convinced but think you really do enjoy pain
and suffering, then give yourself the paper-clip test.
Straighten out one end of a paper clip and push it under
your fingernail. As you push harder and harder, you may
notice how the pain becomes more and- more excruciating.
Now ask yourself—is this really enjoyable? Do I really like
to suffer?

The third hypothesis—you’re ‘‘passive-aggressive’’—
represents the thinking of many therapists, who believe that
depressive behavior can be explained on the basis of ‘‘in-
ternalized anger.’’ Your procrastination could be seen as an
expression of that pent-up hostility because your inaction
often annoys the people around you. One problem with this
theory is that most depressed or procrastinating individuals
simply do not feel particularly angry. Resentment can some-
times contribute to your lack of motivation, but is usually
not central to the problem. Although your family may feel
frustrated about your depression, you probably do not intend
them to react this way. In fact, it is more often the case
that you fear displeasing them. The implication that you are
intentionally doing nothing in order to frustrate them is
insulting and untrue; such a suggestion will only make you
feel worse.

The last theory—you must be getting some ‘‘payoff’’
from procrastination—teflects more recent, behaviorally
oriented psychology. Your moods and actions are seen as
the result of rewards and punishments from your environ-
ment. If you are feeling depressed and doing nothing about
it, it follows that your behavior is being rewarded in some
way.

There is a grain of truth in this; depressed people do
sometimes receive substantial support and reassurance from
others who try to help them. However, the depressed person
rarely enjoys all the attention he receives because of his
profound tendency to disqualify it. If you are depressed and

86 David D. Burns, M.D.

someone tells you they like you, you will probably think,
**He doesn’t know how rotten I am. I don’t deserve this
praise.’ Depression and lethargy have no real rewards.
Theory number four bites the dust with the others.

How can you find the real cause of motivational paralysis?
The study of mood disorders gives us the unique opportunity
to observe extraordinary transformations in levels of per-
sonal motivation within short periods of time. The same
individual who ordinarily bursts with creative energy and
gptimism may be reduced during an episode of depression
to pathetic, bedridden immobility. By tracing dramatic
mood swings, we can gather valuable clues that unlock many
of the mysteries of human motivation. Simply ask yourself,
‘‘When I think about that undone task, what thoughts im-
mediately come to mind?’’ Then write those thoughts down
on a piece of paper. What you write will reflect a number
of maladaptive attitudes, misconceptions, and faulty as-
sumptions. You will learn that the feelings that impede your
motivation, such as apathy, anxiety, or the sense of being
overwhelmed, are the result of distortions in your thinking.

Figure 5—1 shows a typical Lethargy Cycle. The thoughts
on this patient’s mind are negative; he says to himself,
‘‘There’s no point in doing anything because I am a born
loser and so I’m bound to fail.’’ Such a thought sounds very
convincing when you are depressed, immobilizing you and
making you feel inadequate, overwhelmed, self-hating, and
helpless. You then take these negative emotions as proof
that your pessimistic attitudes are valid, and you begin to
change your approach to life. Because you are convinced
you will botch up anything, you don’t even try; you stay
in bed instead. You lie back passively and stare at the
ceiling, hoping to drift into sleep, painfully aware you are
letting your career go down the drain while your business
dwindles into bankruptcy. You may refuse to answer the
phone for fear of hearing bad news; life becomes a treadmill
of boredom, apprehension, and misery. This vicious cycle
can go on indefinitely unless you know how to beat it.

SELF-DEFEATING THOUGHTS:
“There’s no point in doing any-
thing. | don’t have the energy. I’m
not in the mood. Ill probably fail
if | try. Things are too difficult.
There wouldn't be any satisfac-
tion if | did anything’ anyway. |
don't feel like doing anything, so |
don’t have to. I'll just lie here in
bed for a while. | can sleep and

| forget about things. It’s much
easier. Rest is best.”

SELF-DEFEATING
EMOTIONS: You feel
tired, bored, apathetic,

SELF-DEFEATING
ACTIONS: You stick to
bed. You avoid people,
work, and ail potentially
satisfying activities.

self-hating, discouraged,
guilty, helpless, worth-
less, and overwhelmed.

CONSEQUENCES OF THE
LETHARGY CYCLE: You be-
come isolated from friends. This
convinces you that you really are

a loser. Your decreased produc-
tivity convinces you that you ac-
tually are inadequate. You sink
deeper and deeper into an un-
motivated state of paralysis.

Figure 5-1. The Lethargy Cycle. Your self-defeating negative
thoughts make you feel miserable. Your painful emotions in turn
convince you that your distorted, pessimistic thoughts are actually
valid. Similarly, self-defeating thoughts and actions reinforce each
other in a circular manner. The unpleasant consequences of do-
nothingism make your problems even worse.


88 David D. Burns, M.D.

As indicated in Figure 5—1, the relationship between your
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors is reciprocal—all your
emotions and actions are the results of your thoughts and
attitudes. Similarly, your feelings and behavior patterns in-
fluence your perceptions in a wide variety of ways. It follows
from this model that all emotional change is ultimately
brought about by cognitions; changing your behavior will
help you feel better about yourself if it exerts. a positive
influence on the way you are thinking. Thus, you can modify
your self-defeating mental set if you change your behavior
in such a way that you are simultaneously putting the lie to
the self-defeating attitudes that represent the core of your
motivational problem. Similarly, as you change the way
you think, you will feel more in the mood to do things, and
this will have an even stronger positive effect on your think-
ing patterns. Thus, you can transform your lethargy cycle
into a productivity cycle.

The following are the types of mind-sets most commonly
associated with procrastination and do-nothingism. You
may see yourself in one or more of them.

1. Hopelessness. When you are depressed, you get so
frozen in the pain of the present moment that you forget
entirely that you ever felt better in the past and find it
inconceivable that you might feel more positive in the future.
Therefore, any activity will seem pointless because you are
absolutely certain your lack of motivation and sense of
Oppression are unending and irreversible. From this per-
spective the suggestion that you do something to ‘“‘help
yourself ’’ might sound as ludicrous and insensitive as telling
a dying man to cheer up.

2. Helplessness. You can’t possibly do anything that
will make yourself feel better because you are convinced
that your moods are caused by factors beyond your control,
such as fate, hormone cycles, dietary factors, luck, and other
people’s evaluations of you.

FEELING GOOD’ 89

3. Overwhelming Yourself. There are several ways you
may overwhelm yourself into doing nothing. You may mag-
nify a task to the degree that it seems impossible to tackle.
You may assume you must do everything at once instead
of breaking each job down into small, discrete, manageable
units which you can complete one step at a time. You might
also inadvertently distract yourself from the task at hand by
obsessing about endless other things you haven’t gotten
around to doing yet. To illustrate how irrational this is,
imagine that every time you sat down to eat, you thought
about all the food you would have to eat during your life-
time. Just imagine for a moment that all piled up in front
of you are tons of meat, vegetables, ice cream, and thou-
sands of gallons of fluids! And you have to eat every bit of
this food before you die! Now, suppose that before every
meal you said to yourself, ““This meal is just a drop in the
bucket. How can I ever get all that food eaten? There’s just
no point in eating one pitiful hamburger tonight.’’ You’d
feel so nauseated and overwhelmed your appetite would
vanish and your stomach would turn into a knot. When you
think about all the things you are putting off, you do this
very same thing without being aware of it.

4. Jumping to Conclusions. You sense that it’s not
within your power to take effective action that will result
in satisfaction because you are in the habit of saying, °‘l
can’t,’’ or “‘] would but...’’ Thus when I suggested that
a depressed woman bake an apple pie, she responded, “‘l
can’t cook anymore.’’ What she really meant to say was,
‘‘T have the feeling I wouldn’t enjoy cooking and it seems
like it would be awfully difficult.” When she tested these
assumptions by attempting to bake a pie, she found it sur-
prisingly satisfying and not at all difficult.

5. Self-labeling. The more you procrastinate, the more
you condemn yourself as inferior. This saps your self-
confidence further. The problem is compounded when you

90 David D. Burns, M.D.

label yourself ‘‘a procrastinator’ or ‘‘a lazy person.’’ This
causes you to see your lack of effective action as the ‘‘real
you’’ so that you automatically expect little or nothing from
yourself.

6. Undervaluing the Rewards. When you are de-
pressed you may fail to initiate any meaningful activity not
only because you conceive of any task as terribly difficult,
but also because you feel the reward simply wouldn’t be
worth the effort.

‘‘Anhedonia’’ is the technical name for a diminished
ability to experience satisfaction and pleasure. A common
thinking error—your tendency to ‘‘disqualify the posi-
tive’’—-may be at the root of this problem. Do you recall
what this thinking error consists of?

A businessman complained to me that nothing he did all
day was satisfying. He explained that in the morning he
had attempted to return a call from a client, but found the
line was busy. As he hung up, he told himself, ‘“That was
a waste of time.’’ Later in the morning he successfully
completed an important business negotiation. This time he
told himself, ‘‘Anyone in our firm could have handled it
just as well or better. It was an easy problem, and so my
role wasn’t really important.’’ His lack of satisfaction re-
sults from the fact that he always finds a way to discredit
his efforts. His bad habit of saying ‘‘It doesn’t count’’ suc-
cessfully torpedoes any sense of fulfillment.

7. Perfectionism. You defeat yourself with inappropri-
ate goals and standards. You will settle for nothing short
of a magnificent performance in anything you do, so you
frequently end up having to settle for just that—nothing.

8. Fear of Failure. Another mind-set which paralyzes
you is the fear of failure. Because you imagine that putting
in the effort and not succeeding would be an overwhelming
personal defeat, you refuse to try at all. Several thinking
errors are involved in the fear of failure. One of the most

FEELING GOOD 91

common is Overgeneralization. You reason, “‘If I fail at
this, it means I will fail at anything.’’ This, of course, 1s
impossible. Nobody can fail at everything. We all have our
share of victories and defeats. While it is true that victory
tastes sweet and defeat is often bitter, failing at any task
need not be a fatal poison, and the bad taste will not linger
forever.

A second mind-set that contributes to the fear of defeat
is when you evaluate your performance exclusively on the
outcome regardless of your individual effort. This is illogical
and reflects a ‘‘product orientation’’ rather than a ‘‘process
orientation.’’ Let me explain this with a personal example.
As a psychotherapist I can control only what I say and how
I interact with each patient. | cannot control how any par-
ticular patient will respond to my efforts during a given
therapy session. What I say and how I interact is the process;
how each individual reacts is the product. In any given day,
several patients will report that they have benefited greatly
from that day’s session, while a couple of others will tell
me that their session was not particularly helpful. If 1 eval-
uated my work exclusively on the outcome or product, |
would experience a sense of exhilaration whenever a patient
did well, and feel defeated and defective whenever a patient
reacted negatively. This would make my emotional life a
roller coaster, and my self-esteem would go up and down
in an exhausting and unpredictable manner all day long.
But if | admit to myself that all I can control ts the input I
provide in the therapeutic process, I can pride myself on
good consistent work regardless of the outcome of any par-
ticular session. It was a great personal victory when I learned
to evaluate my work based on the process rather than on
the product. If a patient gives me a negative report, I try
to learn from it. If I did make an error, | attempt to correct
it, but I don’t need to jump out the window.

9. Fear of Success. Because of your lack of confidence,
success may seem even more risky than failure because you
are certain it is based on chance. Therefore, you are con-

92 David D. Burns, M.D.

vinced you couldn’t keep it up, and you feel your accom-
plishments will falsely raise the expectations of others. Then
when the awful truth that you are basically ‘‘a loser’’ ul-
timately comes out, the disappointment, rejection, and pain
will be all the more bitter. Since you feel sure you will
eventually fall off the cliff, it seems safer not to go mountain
climbing at all.

You may also fear success because you anticipate that
people will make even greater demands on you. Because
you are convinced you must and can’t meet their expecta-
tions, success would put you into a dangerous and impos-
sible situation. Therefore, you try to maintain control by
avoiding any commitment or involvement.

10. Fear of Disapproval or Criticism. You imagine that
if you try something new, any mistake or flub will be met
with strong disapproval and criticism because the people
you care about won’t accept you if you are human and
imperfect. The risk of rejection seems so dangerous that to
protect yourself you adopt as low a profile as possible. If
you don’t make any effort, you can’t goof up!

11. Coercion and Resentment. A deadly enemy of mo-
tivation is a Sense of coercion. You feel under intense pres-
sure to perform—generated from within and without. This
happens when you try to motivate yourself with moralistic
‘‘shoulds’’ and ‘‘oughts.’’ You tell yourself, ‘‘I should do
this’? and ‘‘I have to do that.’’ Then you feel obliged,
burdened, tense, resentful, and guilty. You feel like a de-
linquent child under the discipline of a tyrannical probation
officer. Every task becomes colored with such unpleasant-
ness that you can’t stand to face it. Then as you procras-
tinate, you condemn yourself as a lazy, no-good bum. This
further drains your energies.

12. Low Frustration Tolerance. You assume that you
should be able to solve your problems and reach your goals

FEELING GOOD 93

rapidly and easily, so you go into a frenzied state of panic
and rage when life presents you with obstacles. Rather than
persist patiently over a period of time, you may retaliate
against the “‘unfairness”’ of it all when things get tough, so
you give up completely. I also call this the ‘‘entitlement
syndrome’’ because you feel and act as if you were entitled
to success, love, approval, perfect health, happiness, etc.

Your frustration results from your habit of comparing
reality with an ideal in your head. When the two don’t
match, you condemn reality. It doesn’t occur to you that it
might be infinitely easier simply to change your expectations
than to bend and twist reality.

This frustration is frequently generated by should state-
ments. While jogging, you might complain, ‘‘For all the
miles I’ve gone, I should be in better shape by now..’’
Indeed? Why should you? You may have the illusion that
such punishing, demanding statements will help you by
driving you on to try harder and to put out more effort. It
rarely works this way. The frustration just adds to your
sense of futility and increases your urge to give up and do
nothing.

13. Guilt and Self-blame. If you are frozen in the con-
viction you are bad or have let others down, you will nat-
urally feel unmotivated to pursue your daily life. I recently
treated a lonely elderly woman who spent her days in bed
in spite of the fact that she felt better when she shopped,
cooked, and socialized with her friends. Why? This sweet
woman was holding herself responsible for her daughter’s
divorce five years earlier. She explained, ‘‘When I visited
them, I should have sat down and talked things over with
my son-in-law. I should have asked him how things were
going. Maybe I could have helped. I wanted to and yet I
didn’t take the opportunity. Now I feel I failed them.’’ After
we reviewed the illogic in her thinking, she felt better im-
mediately and became active again. Because she was human
and not God, she could not have been expected to predict
the future or to know precisely how to intervene.

94 David D. Burns, M.D.

By now you may be thinking, “‘So what? I know that
my do-nothingism is in a way illogical and self-defeating.
I can see myself in several of the mental sets you’ve de-
scribed. But I feel like I’m trying to wade through a pool
of molasses. I just can’t get myself going. You may say all
this oppression just results from my attitudes, but it feels
like a ton of bricks. So what can I do about it?’’

Do you know why virtually any meaningful activity has
a decent chance of brightening your mood? If you do noth-
ing, you will become preoccupied with the flood of negative,
destructive thoughts. If you do something, you will be tem-
porarily distracted from that internal dialogue of self-
denigration. What is even more important, the sense of
mastery you will experience will disprove many of the dis-
torted thoughts that slowed you down in the first place.

As you review the following self-activation techniques,
choose a couple that appeal most to you and work at them
for a week or two. Remember you don’t have to master
them all! One man’s salvation can be another’s curse. Use
the methods that seem the most tailored to your particular
brand of procrastination.

The Daily Activity Schedule. The Daily Activity Sched-
ule (see Figure 5—2, page 95) 1s simple but effective, and
can help you get organized in your fight against lethargy
and apathy. The schedule consists of two parts. In the Pro-
spective column, write out an hour-by-hour plan for what
you would like to accomplish each day. Even though you
may actually carry out only a portion of your plan, the simple
act of creating a method of action every day can be im-
mensely helpful. Your plans need not be elaborate. Just put
one or two words in each time slot to indicate what you’d
like to do, such as ‘‘dress,’’ ‘‘eat lunch,’’ ‘‘prepare ré-
sumé,’’ etc. It should not require more than five minutes to
do this.

At the end of the day, fill out the Retrospective column.
Record tn each time slot what you actually did during the
day. This may be the same as or different from what you

Figure 5-2. Daily Activity Schedule.

PROSPECTIVE:

Plan your activities on an
hour-by-hour basis at the start
of the day.

Date
TIME

9-10
10—11
11-12

12-1

9-12

T
>

RETROSPECTIVE:

At the end of the day, record
what you actually did and
rate each activity with an M
for mastery or a P for plea-
sure. *

*Mastery and pleasure activities must be rated from 0 to 5. the higher
the number, the greater the sense of satisfaction.

96 David D. Burns, M.D.

actually planned; nevertheless, even if it was just staring at
the wall, write it down. In addition, label each activity with
the letter M for mastery or the letter P for pleasure. Mastery
activities are those which represent some accomplishment,
such as brushing your teeth, cooking dinner, driving to
work, etc. Pleasure might include reading a book, eating,
going to a movie, etc. After you have wntten M or P for
each activity, estimate the actual amount of pleasure, or the
degree of difficulty in the task by using a zero to five rating.
For example, you could give yourself a score of M-1 for
particularly easy tasks like getting dressed, while M-4 or
M-5 would indicate you did something more difficult and
challenging, such as not eating too much or applying for a
job. You can rate the pleasure activities in a similar manner.
If any activity was pleasurable in the past when you were
not depressed, but today it was nearly or totally devoid of
pleasure, put a P-% or a P-0. Some activities, such as
cooking dinner, can be labeled M and P.

Why is this simple activity schedule likely to be helpful?
First, it will undercut your tendency to obsess endlessly
about the value of various activities and to debate counter-
productively about whether or not to do something. Ac-
complishing even a part of your scheduled activities will in
all probability give you some satisfaction and will combat
your depression.

As you plan your day, develop a balanced program that
provides for enjoyable leisure activities as well as work. If
you are feeling blue, you may want to put a special emphasis
on fun, even if you doubt you can enjoy things as much as
usual. You may be depleted from having asked too much
of yourself, causing an imbalance in your ‘‘give-and-get’’
system. If so, take a few days of “‘vacation’’ and schedule
only those things you want to do.

If you adhere to the schedule, you will find your moti-
vation increasing. As you start doing things, you will begin
to disprove your belief that you are incapable of functioning
effectively. As one procrastinator reported, ““By scheduling
my day and comparing the results, | have become aware of

FEELING GOOD 97

how I spend my time. This has helped me take charge of
my life once again. I realize that I can be in control if I
want to.’’

Keep this Daily Activity Schedule for at least a week.
As you review the activities in which you participated during
the previous week, you will see that some have given you
a greater sense of mastery and pleasure, as indicated by
higher scores. As you continue planning each upcoming
day, use this information to schedule more of those activ-
ities, and avoid others which are associated with lower sat-
isfaction levels.

The Daily Activity Schedule can be especially helpful for
a common syndrome I call the ‘‘weekend/holiday blues.’’
This is a pattern of depression most often reflected in people
who are single and have their greatest emotional difficulties
when alone. If you fit this description, you probably assume
these periods are bound to be unbearable, so you do very
little to care for yourself creatively. You stare at the walls
and mope, or lie in bed all day Saturday and Sunday; or,
for good times, you watch a boring TV show and eat a
meager dinner of a peanut-butter sandwich and a cup of
instant coffee. No wonder your weekends are tough! Not
only are you depressed and alone but you treat yourself in
a way that can only inflict pain. Would you treat someone
else in such a sadistic manner?

These weekend blues can be overcome by using the Daily
Activity Schedule. On Friday night, schedule some plans
for Saturday on an hourly basis. You may resist this, saying,
‘“What’s the point? I’m all alone.’’ The fact that you are
all alone is the very reason for using the schedule. Why
assume you’re bound to be miserable? This prediction can
function only as a self-fulfilling prophecy! Put it to the test
by adopting a productive approach. Your plans need not be
elaborate in order to be helpful. You can schedule going to
the hairdresser, shopping, visiting an art museum, reading
a book, or walking through the park. You will discover that
laying out and adhering to a simple plan for the day can go
a long way toward lifting your mood. And who knows-—if

98 David D. Burns, M.D.

you are willing to care for yourself, you may suddenly notice
that others will act more interested in you as well!

At the end of the day before you go to bed, write down
what you actually did each hour and rate each activity for
Mastery and Pleasure. Then make out a new schedule for
the following day. This simple procedure may be the first
step toward a sense of self-respect and genuine self-reliance.

The Antiprocrastination Sheet. In Figure 5-3 is a form
I have found effective in breaking the habit of procrasti-
nation. You may be avoiding a particular activity because
you predict it will be too difficult aad unrewarding. Using
the Antiprocrastination Sheet, you can train yourself to test
these negative predictions. Each day write down in the ap-
propriate column one or more tasks you have been putting
off. If the task requires substantial time and effort, it is best
to break it down into a series of small steps so that each
one can be completed in fifteen minutes or less. Now write
down in the next column how difficult you predict each step
of the task will be, using a O-to-100 percent scale. If you
imagine the task will be easy, you can write down a low
estimate such as 10 to 20 percent; for harder tasks, use 80
to 90 percent. In the next column, write down your pre-
diction of how satisfying and rewarding it will be to com-
plete each phase of the task, again using the percentage
system. Once you’ve recorded these predictions, go ahead
and complete the first step of the task. After you’ve com-
pleted each step, take note of how difficult it actually turned
out to be, as well as the amount of pleasure you gained
from doing it. Record this information in the last two col-
umns, again using the percentage system.

Figure 5—3 shows how a college professor used this form
to overcome several months of putting off writing a letter
applying for a teaching position opening up at another uni-
versity. As you can see, he anticipated that writing the letter
would be difficult and unrewarding. After he recorded his
pessimistic predictions, he became curious to outline the
letter and prepare a rough draft to see if it would be as

‘ION OY} [lew

C6 0 S os pue sdojaaud oY} SsaIppy ‘p
08 s OI CL ‘yeip yeuy dn odXJ, “¢
CL Ol Ol 06 “‘YeIP YSNOL UA “7
09 OT OT 06 ‘JOVOT SUIPNO “T 66/01/9
(%00I-0) (%00I-0) (%00I-0) (%00I-0) (sdajs [ows ojuy HO]
Uo dvf{syvs Aqnoyffiq uoNrD{SyDS Aqynoyfiq UMOP YSD] YOva yHa1g)
jonioy jonjoy paripadd parnpard ANANOY

(‘des yore pajajdwoo eaey nod saye uonoejsies
pue Aynoysip penjoe ou} UMOP IAA “ySe} OU JdwWeye NOA esojeg UONORJSHeS PUe AYNOWJIP pe}oIpesd OU] UMOP 2}1AA)

je0US UOHeUIIse1I0NdIUY SUL

‘alam Ajyeas Suoiejoedxe eanebeu siy eseq-yo MOY 89S O} pezewe sem oH ‘sem Ajjenjoe yi Bulpsemes pue YNdIIP MOY
UMOP 8}0JM ay ‘de}s yore Bunajdwood seyy *(SuLUN|OD eyelIdoidde eu) ees) eq pjnom dajs yore Hulpyemas puke YNOIYJIP
MOY 8]e0sS }USdJEd QQ}.-0}-9 & UO JOIPeId 0} pue Sde}s {Fes OUI UMOP YS} BU} YeeIG 0} Peploep eH ‘Hulpyemosun pue
INOWJIP 8q PINoM 1 peuibew! ay esneoeg Joye; e HBuluM u! SuUJUOW JeJOAGS JO] peyeuNsesooid Jossejoid y “E—-sg aunBi4


100 David D. Burns, M.D.

tedious and unrewarding as he thought. He found to his
great surprise that it turned out to be easy and satisfying,
and he felt sufficiently motivated that he went on to complete
the letter. He recorded this data in the last two columns.
The information gained from this experiment so greatly
astonished him that he used the Antiprocrastination Sheet
in many other areas in his life. Consequently, his produc-
tivity and self-confidence underwent a dramatic increase,
and his depression disappeared.

Daily Record of Dysfunctional Thoughts. This record,
introduced in Chapter 4, can be used to great advantage
when you are overwhelmed by the urge to do nothing.
Simply write down the thoughts that run through your mind
when you think about a particular task. This will immedi-
ately show you what your problem is. Then write down
appropriate rational responses that show these thoughts are
unrealistic. This will help you mobilize enough energy to
take that first difficult step. Once you’ve done that, you will
gain momentum and be on your way.

An example of this approach 1s indicated in Figure 5-4.
Annette is an attractive, young single woman who owns
and operates a successful boutique (she is Patient A, de-
scribed on page 83). She does well during the week because
of all the bustle at her store. On weekends she tends to hide
away in bed unless she has social activities lined up. The
moment she gets into bed, she becomes despondent, yet
claims tt is beyond her control to get out of bed. As Annette
recorded her automatic thoughts one Sunday evening (Fig-
ure 5—4), it became obvious what her problems were: She
was waiting around until she felt the desire, interest, and
energy to do something; she was assuming that there was
no point in doing anything since she was alone; and she
was persecuting and insulting herself because of her inac-
tivity.

When she talked back to her thoughts, she reported that
the clouds lifted just a bit so that she was able to get up,
take a shower, and get dressed. She then felt even better

-IoJUI oloul jos Alqe
-qoJld |] J ‘Surujauros 3
poyiels jos | J] “sulNjOU
sulop Ul, uwsyM jou
jnq “s}soIOjJUI SACY OP J

jsuryy
YONS OU $1 JI9Y) asned
-3q , UOosiad & se dINTIey
B,, UW] UesUI J,US3OP 11
jnq ‘pojoq pue possaid
-Op Ul soyeul SsUIOU
SUIOG °0} JUBM J UdYM
SSUIY} 38 padoons Op |

‘poydduo jou UW]
‘poq JO Ino jos UDI |

“SJSOJOJUL [VOT OU SARY JT

"UOS
-Jod & SB OIN[Ie] & WL]

‘pag JO jno 193 0}
ASJOUS OY} DALY 3.UOP |

AjauoJ ‘sayonpoid suryjAue

"JSCO] Je JOMOYS jUOT}Oe SMOTIOJ pouey-jjas op Jo dn 308 0} Asiaus

Boye} puednjos uoneanow  sJoquow AyIng JO alsop ou—uo pue

0} poploop pue -dy <‘suIyjOU suUIOp ‘surjAue = paysneyxq jo  3days—Aepuns
Joljed OUIOS JO Wy osnes0q $.JeUL, Op 0} oNIsop ou savy] pesssideq Aepyepoqurpokeisy, 66/ST/L
IUOIINO sasuodsay Jovuojvy syysnoyy, Iowuojny suoljoMy uolONS ajod

‘sjysnoyl jeuotounjshq Jo ploosy ApIeqd “p—g ainbi4

‘poq ur ZulA] Wy
usyum ABM 3eUy} UIDs
},USSOp 11 YSNOY UdAd
‘popeys 303 7 sou 71 Aof
-ua Ajqeqosd [1.7 suru)

-SUWUOS OP | J] “poos [3a]
J uoym ssuryy Aolus |

“O) JUBM

[| SuiyjAue Op 0} 903]
UW J dW WIM Op 0}
SARY Jey} SCOP JHYM OS

‘passaid
-ap a1,.no0A usuM poise
-J9JUI SSI] 9q 0} JeINJeU
SJ “pood Ayjeor sur
-[99J} Wy usyM ssuryy
JayjO ;ogeR wed op |

sasuodsay jvuouvy

‘surpyAue Aofus },uop |

“Sdajasuoy) BuTAol
-Ud JNO are a]doad sop

“oul puNnore uo
Sulos seu, suryjAue
jNoge asvd 1 UOp | asNeVd
-9Q poigjuas-jjas WI]

siysnoy [ JyuoWoOINY

"JU0d ‘ple aun6i-

‘SSUlY) BUIOp ye}s
pue poq jo 3no jod ued
[ seo] 1Y “uUMO AU UO
SUTYIOWIOS OP 0} apIsap
‘OS “Y[BI 0} OW ZUTDIOJ
$,0u0 ON j),UOp os

‘NjasIOUs SIOU!
93 | ‘SBUIY) Ul PoAfoA
-Ul 393 J UsUAA “ABIO
“Ua JO [JNJ WJ ‘poos
[293 [ UsyA ‘sins
“O91 dWOS BSUId9S pue
MOU HI UO BULYIOM UL J
-JBU} JO Joold Ou oaey |

“QuOAUB 99S JO DUOAUP
O} HB} 0} UBM },UOp |

"JOAg] ABIOUS jew
-IOU B SAPY IIADU II]


104 David D. Burns, M.D.

and arranged to meet a friend for dinner and a movie. As
she predicted in the Rational Responses column, the more
she did, the better she felt.

If you decide to use this method, be sure you actually
write down upsetting thoughts. If you try to figure them out
in your head, you will in all probability get nowhere because
the thoughts that stymie you are slippery and complex.
When you try to talk back to them, they’!l come at you even
harder from all angles with such speed that you won’t even
know what hit you. But when you write them down, they
become exposed to the light of reason. This way you can
reflect on them, pinpoint the distortions, and come up with
some helpful answers.

The Pleasure-Predicting Sheet. One of Annette’s self-
defeating attitudes is her assumption that there is no point
in doing anything productive if she is alone. Because of this
belief, she does nothing and feels miserable, which just
confirms her attitude that it’s terrible to be alone.

Solution: Test your belief that there is no point in doing
anything by using the Pleasure-Predicting Sheet shown in
Figure 5—5, page 105. Over a period of weeks, schedule a
number of activities that contain a potential for personal
growth or satisfaction. Do some of them by yourself and
some with others. Record who you did each activity with
in the appropriate column, and predict how satisfying each
will be—between 0 and 100 percent. Then go and do them.
In the Actual Satisfaction column, write down how enjoy-
able each activity really turned out to be. You may be
surprised to learn that things you do on your own are more
gratifying than you thought.

Make sure that the things you do by yourself are of equal
quality as those you do with others so that your comparisons
will be valid. If you choose to eat a TV dinner alone, for
example, don’t compare it with the fancy French restaurant
dinner you share with a friend!

Figure 5-5 shows the activities of a young man who
learned that his girl friend (who lived 200 miles away) had

%08 %OL JTas SUISBOL 66/€1/8

%S8 %08 poLj s Apoqesd 66/71/8
%OL %09 J19s Winesnul WW 66/T1/8
OL OL uog pue uesns JOUUIG 66/T1/8
%OL %0S ped sues Sold 66/01/38
%08 %OL Jas BUIS30f 66/01/8
%S8 %09 Wp pue veg ‘yor ‘ALIeH SAUPH 66/6/83
%OL %08 ony IW L 66/8/8
%06 %09 Jas BUISS30f 66/L/8
%OL OL ajdood ¢ 4 tony Ayred ston] 66/9/8
%08 %09 [dood 7] S AOUBN 38 JOUUIG 66 /9/8
: %S9 SL aqjaor pue AoueNn asnoy S,AdUeN 66/S/8
®OE ®Ov eulpuels pue sjuored UspoH juny pue iy AN 66/S/8
%S8 %08 Jas Ayed suesng 66/P/8
%06 %08 uog usg/M Jeq + JOUUIG 66/€/8
%09 %0S JTas (inoy ][) SUIPesy 66/7/38
(Aj1ANIVY Yy] IV (AQIANOYW ayj s10JOgG (fjag Kfroads (ainsva}q 410 avg
S14, P4024) (%OOI-O) SML 214M) (%00I-0) ‘auoly ft) EYtM juauadaiyoy fo asuag)

uoyov{syvS JONIOY uoNdv{SyDS palaipard SIYT OG NOX pig OYM = ‘uonov{suvy sof knanoy

‘yeaUuS HunNoipelg-einseajq eu, *s—G einbi4

106 David D. Burns, M.D.

a new boyfriend and didn’t want to see him. Instead of
moping in self-pity, he became involved with life. You will
notice in the last column that the satisfaction levels he ex-
perienced by himself ranged from 60 to 90 percent, while
those with other people ranged from 30 to 90 percent. This
knowledge strengthened his self-reliance because he realized
that he wasn’t condemned to misery because he lost his girl,
and that he didn’t need to depend on others to enjoy himself.

You can use the Pleasure-Predicting Sheet to test a num-
ber of assumptions you might make that lead to procrasti-
nation. These include:

1. I can’t enjoy anything when I’m alone.

2. There’s no point in doing anything because I failed at
something important to me (e.g., I didn’t get the job
or promotion I had my heart set on).

3. Since I’m not rich, successful, or famous, I can’t really
enjoy things to the hilt.

4. I can’t enjoy things unless I’m the center of attention.

5. Things won’t be particularly satisfying unless I can
do them perfectly (or successfully).

6. I wouldn’t feel very fulfilled if I did just a part of my
work. I’ve got to get it all done today.

All of these attitudes will produce a round of self-fulfilling
prophecies if you don’t put them to the test. If, however,
you check them out using the Pleasure-Predicting Sheet,
you may be amazed to learn that life can offer you enormous
fulfillment. Help yourself!

A question that commonly comes up about the Pleasure-
Predicting Sheet is: ‘“Suppose I do schedule a number of
activities, and I find out they are just as unpleasant as I had
anticipated?’’ This might happen. If so, try noting your
negattve thoughts and write them down, answering them
with the Daily Record of Dysfunctional Thoughts. For ex-
ample, suppose you go to a restaurant on your own and feel

FEELING GOOD _ 107

tense. You might be thinking, ‘‘These people probably think
I’m a loser because I’m here all alone.’’

How would you answer this? You might remind yourself
that other peaple’s thoughts do not affect your mood one
iota. I have demonstrated this to patients by telling them I
will think two thoughts about them for fifteen seconds each.
One thought will be extremely positive, and the other will
be intensely negative and insulting. They are to tell me how
each of my thoughts affects them. I close my eyes and think,
‘*Jack here is a fine person and I like him.’’ Then I think,
‘‘Jack is the worst person in Pennsylvania.’’ Since Jack
doesn’t know which thought is which, they have no effect
on him!

Does that brief experiment strike you as trivial? It’s not—
because only your thoughts can ever affect you. For ex-
ample, if you are in a restaurant feeling miserable because
you are alone, you really have no idea what people are
thinking. It’s your thoughts and only yours that are making
you feel terrible; you’re the only person in the world who
can effectively persecute yourself. Why do you label your-
self a ‘‘loser’’ because you’re in a restaurant alone? Would
you be so cruel to someone else? Stop insulting yourself
like that! Talk back to that automatic thought with a rational
response: ‘‘Going to a restaurant alone doesn’t make me a
loser. I have just as much right to be here as anyone else.
If someone doesn’t like it, so what? As long as I respect
myself, I don’t need to be concerned with others’ opinions.’’

How to Get off Your “‘But’—the But Rebuttal. Your
‘‘but’’ may represent the greatest obstacle to effective ac-
tion. The moment you think of doing something productive,
you give yourself excuses in the form of buts. For example,
‘*Y could go out and jog today, BUT...’’

1. I’m really too tired to;
2. I’m just too lazy;
3. I’m not particularly in the mood, etc.

108 David D. Burns, M.D.

Figure 5-6. The But-Rebuttal Method. The zigzag arrows trace
your thinking pattern as you debate the issue in your mind.

I really should mow the Pll feel more like it once I
lawn, but I’m just not in the get started. When I’m done
mood. I'll feel terrific.

But now it’s so long it It won’t take that much extra

would take forever. time with the power mower.
I can always do a part of it
now.

But I’m too tired. So just do some of it and
rest.

I’d rather rest now or I can, but I won’t feel very

watch TV. good about it knowing this
chore is hanging over my
head.

But I’m just too lazy to That can’t be true—I’ve
do it today. done it on numerous occa-
sions in the past.

Here’s another example. ‘‘I could cut down on my smoking,
BUT...”’

1. I don’t have that kind of self-discipline;

2. I don’t really feel like going cold turkey, and cutting
down gradually would be slow torture;

3. I’ve been too nervous lfately.

If you really want to motivate yourself, you’ll have to
learn how to get off your but. One way to do this is with
the ‘‘But-Rebuttal Method’’ shown in Figure 5—6. Suppose
it’s Saturday and you’ve scheduled mowing the lawn.
You’ve procrastinated for three weeks, and it looks like a
jungle. You tell yourself, ‘‘I really should, BUT I’m just

FEELING GOOD — 109

not in the mood.’’ Record this in the But column. Now
fight back by writing a But Rubuttal: ‘‘T’ll feel more like it
once I get started. When I’m done, Ill feel terrific.’’ Your
next impulse will probably be to dream up a new objection:
‘‘BUT it’s so long it will take forever.’’ Now fight back
with a new rebuttal, as shown in Figure 5—6, and continue
this process until you’ve run out of excuses.

Learn to Endorse Yourself. Do you frequently convince
yourself that what you do doesn’t count? If you have this
bad habit, you will naturally feel that you never do anything
worthwhile. It won’t make any difference if you are a Nobel
laureate or a gardener—life will seem empty because your
sour attitude will take the joy out of all your endeavors and
defeat you before you even begin. No wonder you feel
unmotivated!

To reverse this destructive tendency, a good first step
would be to pinpoint the self-downing thoughts that cause
you to feel this way in the first place. Talk back to these
thoughts and replace them with ones that are more objective
and self-endorsing. Some examples of this are shown in
Figure 5—7. Once you get the knack of it, practice con-
sciously endorsing yourself all day long for the things you
do even if they seem trivial. You may not feel a pleasant
emotional lift in the beginning, but keep practicing even if
it seems mechanical. After a few days you will begin to
experience some mood lift, and you will feel more pride
about what you’re doing.

You may object, ‘““Why should I have to pat myself on
the back for everything I do? My family, friends, and busi-
ness associates should be more appreciative of me.’’ There
are several problems here. In the first place, even if people
are overlooking your efforts, you are guilty of the same
crime if you also neglect yourself, and pouting won’t im-
prove the situation.

Even when someone does stroke you, you can’t absorb
the praise unless you decide to believe and therefore validate
what is being said. How many genuine compliments fall on

110 David D. Burns, M.D.

Figure 5-7.

Self-Downing Statement

Self-Endorsing Statement

Anybody could wash these If it’s a routine, boring job, I
dishes. deserve extra credit for doing
it.

There was no point in washing That’s just the point. They’ll
these dishes. They’ll just get be clean when we need them.
dirty again.

I could have done a better job Nothing in the universe is per-
straightening up. fect, but I did make the room
look a hell of a lot better.

It was just luck the way my It wasn’t a matter of luck. I

speech turned out. prepared well and delivered
my talk effectively. I did a darn
good job.

I waxed the car, but it still The car looks a heck of a lot

doesn’t look as good as my better than it did. Pll enjoy

neighbor’s new car. driving it around.

your deaf ears because you mentally discredit them? When
you do this, other people feel frustrated because you don’t
respond positively to what they are saying. Naturally, they
give up trying to combat your self-downing habit. Ulti-
mately, only what you think about what you do will affect
your mood.

It can be helpful simply to make a written or mental list
of the things you do each day. Then give yourself a mental
credit for each of them, however small. This will help you
focus on what you have done instead of what you haven't
gotten around to doing. It may sound simplistic, but it
works!

TIG:TOC Technique. If you are procrastinating about
getting down to a specific task, take note of the way you
are thinking about it. These TICs, or Task-Interfering Cog-

FEELING GOOD 111

nitions, will lose much of their power over you if you simply
write them down and substitute more adaptive TOCs, or
Task-Oriented Cognitions, using the double-column tech-
nique. A number of examples are shown in Figure 5-8.
When you record your TIC-TOCs, be sure to pinpoint the
distortion in the TIC that defeats you. You may find, for
example, that your worst enemy is all-or-nothing thinking
or disqualifying the positive, or you may be in the bad habit
of making arbitrary negative predictions. Once you become
aware of the type of distortion that most commonly thwarts
you, you will be able to correct it. Your procrastination and
time-wasting will give way to action and creativity.

You can also apply this principle to mental images and
daydreams as well as to thoughts. When you avoid a task,
you probably automatically fantasize about it in a negative,
defeatist fashion. This creates unnecessary tension and ap-
prehension, which impairs your performance and increases
the likelihood that your dreaded fear will actually come true.

For example, if you have to give a speech to a group of
associates, you may fret and worry for weeks ahead of time
because in your mind’s eye you see yourself forgetting what
you have to say or reacting defensively to a pushy question
from the audience. By the time you give the speech, you
have effectively programmed yourself to behave just this
way, and you’re such a nervous wreck it turns out just as
badly as you had imagined!

If you dare to give it a try, here’s a solution: For ten
minutes every night before you go to sleep, practice fan-
tasizing that you deliver the speech in a positive way. Imag-
ine that you appear confident, that you present your material
in an energetic manner, and that you handle all questions
from the audience warmly and capably. You may be sur-
prised that this simple exercise can go a long way to im-
proving how you feel about what you do. Obviously there
is no guarantee things will always come out exactly as you
imagine, but there’s no doubt that your expectations and
mood will profoundly influence what actually does happen.

Figure 5—8. The TIC-TOC Technique. In the left-hand column, re-
cord the thoughts that inhibit your motivation for a specific task. In
the right-hand column, pinpoint the distortions and substitute more

objective, productive attitudes.

TICs
(Task-interfering Cognitions)

Housewife:
I’ll never be able to get the ga-
rage cleaned out. The junk’s
been piling up for years.

Bank Clerk:
My work isn’t very important
or exciting.

Student:
Writing this term paper is
pointless. The subject is bor-
ing.

Secretary:
I'll probably flub typing this
and make a bunch of typos.
Then my boss will yell at me.

Politician:
If I lose this race for governor,
I'll be a laughing stock.

TOCs

(Task-oriented Cognitions)
Overgeneralization; all-or-
nothing thinking.
Just do a little bit and get
started. There’s no reason |
have to do it all today.
Disqualifying the positive.
It may seem routine to me, but
it’s quite important to the peo-
ple who use the bank. When
I’m not depressed, it can be
very enjoyable. Many people
do routine work but this
doesn’t make them unimpor-
tant human beings. Maybe I
could do something more ex-
citing in my free time.
All-or-nothing thinking.
Just do a routine job. It doesn’t
have to be a masterpiece. I
might learn something, and it
will make me feel better to get
it done.

Fortune teller error.

I don’t have to type perfectly.
I can correct the errors. If he’s
overly critical, I can disarm
him, or tell him I’d do better
if he were more supportive and
less demanding.

Fortune teller error; labeling.

It’s not shameful to lose a po-
litical contest. A lot of people
respect me for trying and tak-
ing an honest stand on some

Figure 5—8. cont.

TICs
(Task-interfering Cognitions)

Insurance Salesman:
What’s the point in calling this
guy back? He didn’t sound in-
terested.

Shy Single Man:

If 1 call up an attractive girl,
she'll just dump on me, so
what’s the point? Pll just wait
around until some girl makes
it real obvious that she likes
me. Then I won’t have to take
a risk.

Author:

This chapter has to be great.
But I don’t feel very creative.
Athlete:

I can’t discipline myself. I
have no self-control. I'll never

get in shape.

TOCs
(Task-oriented Cognitions)
important issues. Unfortu-

nately, the best man often
doesn’t win, but I can believe
in myself whether or not I
come out on top.

Mind reading.

I have no way of knowing.
Give it a try. At least he asked
me to call back. Some people
will be interested and I have to
sift the chaff from the wheat.
I can feel productive even
when someone turns me down.
Pll sell one policy on the av-
erage for every five people
who turn me down, so it’s to
my advantage to get as many
turndowns as possible! The

more turndowns, the more
sales!
Fortune teller error; over-

generalization.

They can’t all turn me down,
and it’s not shameful to try. I
can learn from any rejection.
I’ve got to start practicing to
improve my style, so take the
big plunge! It took courage to
jump off the high dive the first
time, but I did it and survived.
I can do this too!
All-or-nothing thinking.

Just prepare an adequate draft.
I can improve it later.
Disqualifying the positive; all-
or-nothing thinking.

I must have self-control be-
cause I’ve done well. Just
work out for a while and call
it quits if I get exhausted.

114 David D. Burns, M.D.

Little Steps for Little Feet. A simple and obvious self-
activation method involves learning to break any proposed
task down into its tiny component parts. This will combat
your tendency to overwhelm yourself by dwelling on all the
things you have to do.

Suppose your job involves attending lots of meetings, but
you find it difficult to concentrate due to anxiety, depression,
or daydreaming. You can’t concentrate effectively because
you think, ‘‘I don’t understand this as I should. Gosh, this
is boring. I’d really prefer to be making love or fishing nght
now.’

Here’s how you can beat the boredom, defeat the dis-
traction, and increase your ability to concentrate: Break
the task down into its smallest component parts! For ex-
ample, decide to listen for only three minutes, and then
take a one-minute break to daydream intensively. At the
end of this mental vacation, listen for another three min-
utes, and do not entertain any distracting thoughts for this
brief period. Then give yourself another one-minute break
to daydream.

This technique will enable you to maintain a more ef-
fective level of overall concentration. Giving yourself per-
mission to dwell on distracting thoughts for short periods
will diminish their power over you. After a while, they will
seem ludicrous.

An extremely useful way to divide a task into manageable
units is through time limitation. Decide how much time you
will devote to a particular task, and then stop at the end of
the allotted time and go on to something more enjoyable,
whether or not you’re finished. As simple as this sounds,
it can work wonders. For example, the wife of a political
VIP spent years harboring resentment toward her husband
for his successful, glamorous life. She felt her life consisted
of an oppressive load of child-rearing and housecleaning.
BecauSe she was compulsive she never felt she had enough
time to complete her dreary chores. Life was a treadmill.
She was straddled by depression, and had been unsuccess-

FEELING GOOD 115

fully treated by a long string of famous therapists for over
a decade as she looked in vain for the elusive key to personal
happiness.

After consulting twice with one of my colleagues (Dr.
Aaron T. Beck), she experienced a rapid mood swing out
of her depression (his therapeutic wizardry never ceases to
astonish me). How did he perform this seeming miracle?
Easy. He suggested to her that her depression was due in
part to the fact that she wasn’t pursuing goals that were
meaningful to her because she didn’t believe in herself.
Instead of acknowledging and confronting her fear of taking
risks, she blamed her lack of direction on her husband and
complained about all the undone housework.

The first step was to decide how much time she felt she
wanted to spend on the housework each day; she was to
spend no more than this amount even if the house wasn’t
perfect, and she was to budget the rest of the day to pursue
activities that interested her. She decided that one hour of
housework would be fair, and enrolled in a graduate program
so she could develop her own career. This gave her a feeling
of liberation. Like magic, the depression vanished along
with the anger she harbored toward her husband.

I don’t want to give you the idea that depression is usually
so easy to eliminate. Even in the above case, this patient
will probably have to fight off a number of depressive re-
currences. She may at times fall back temporarily into the
same trap of trying to do too much, blaming others, and
feeling overwhelmed. Then she will have to apply the same
solution again. The important thing is—she has found a
method that works for her.

The same approach might work for you. Do you tend to
bite off bigger pieces than you can comfortably chew? Dare
to put modest time limits on what you do! Have the courage
to walk away from an unfinished task! You may be amazed
that you will experience a substantial increase in your pro-
ductivity and mood, and your procrastination may become
a thing of the past.

116 David D. Burns, M.D.

Motivation Without Coercion. A possible source of
your procrastination is an inappropriate system for self-
motivation. You may inadvertently undermine what you
attempt by flagellating yourself with so many ‘‘oughts,”’
‘*shoulds,’’ and ‘‘musts’’ that you end up drained of any
desire to get moving. You are defeating yourself by the way
you kill yourself to get moving! Dr. Albert Ellis describes
this mental trap as ‘‘musterbation.”’

Reformulate the way you tell yourself to do things by
eliminating those coercive words from your vocabulary. An
alternative to pushing yourself to get up in the morning
would be to say, ‘‘It will make me feel better to get out of
bed, even though it will be hard at first. Although I’m not
obliged to, | might end up being glad I did. If, on the other
hand, I’m really benefiting from the rest and relaxation, I
may as well go ahead and enjoy it!’’ If you translate shoulds
into wants, you will be treating yourself with a sense of
respect. This will produce a feeling of freedom of choice
and personal dignity. You will find that a reward system
works better and lasts longer than a whip. Ask yourself,
‘*What do I want to do? What course of action would be
to my best advantage?’’ I think you will find that this way
of looking at things will enhance your motivation.

If you still have the desire to lie in bed, mope, and feel
doubtful that getting up is really what you want to do, make
a list of the advantages and disadvantages of staying in bed
for another day. For example, an accountant who was far
behind in his work around tax time found it hard to get up
each day. His customers began to complain about the undone
work, and in order to avoid these embarrassing confronta-
tions, he lay in bed for weeks trying to escape, not even
answering the phone. Many customers fired him, and his
business began to fail.

His mistake was in telling himself, ‘‘I know | should go
to work but I don’t want to. And I don’t have to either! So
I won’t!’’ Essentially, the word “‘should’’ created the il-
lusion that the only reason for him to get out of bed was to
please a bunch of angry, demanding customers. This was

FEELING GOOD 117

Advantages of
Lying in Bed Disadvantages of Lying in Bed

1. It’s easy. 1. While it seems easy, it gets awfully
boring and painful after a while. It’s
actually not so easy to do nothing and
to lie here moping and criticizing my-
self hour after hour.

2. I won’t have to 2. I won’t be obliged to do anything if
do anything or I get out of bed either, but it might
face my _prob- feel better. If I avoid my problems
lems. they won’t go away, they’ll just get

worse, and I won’t have the satisfac-
tion of trying to solve them. The
short-term discomfort of facing up to
things is probably less depressing |
than the endless anguish of staying in

bed.
3. I can sleep and 3. | can’t sleep forever, and I really
escape. don’t need any more sleep since !

have been sleeping nearly sixteen
hours a day. I will probably feel less
fatigued if I get up and get my arms
and legs moving rather than lie
around in bed like a cripple waiting
for my arms and legs to rot!

so unpleasant that he resisted. The absurdity of what he was
doing to himself became apparent when he made a list of
the advantages and disadvantages of staying in bed (Figure
5-9, above). After preparing this list, he realized it was to
his advantage to get out of bed. As he subsequently became
more involved with his work, his mood rapidly improved
in spite of the fact that he had lost many accounts during
the period of inactivity.

Disarming Technique. Your sense of paralysis will be
intensified if your family and friends are tn the habit of

118 David D. Burns, M.D.

pushing and cajoling you. Their nagging should statements
reinforce the insulting thoughts already echoing through
your head. Why is their pushy approach doomed to failure?
It’s a basic law of physics that for every action there’s an
equal and opposite reaction. Any time you feel shoved,
whether by someone’s hand actually on your chest or by
someone trying to boss you around, you will naturally
tighten up and resist so as to maintain your equilibrium and
balance. You will attempt to exert your self-control and
preserve your dignity by refusing to do the thing that you
are being pushed to do. The paradox is that you often end
up hurting yourself.

It can be very confusing when someone obnoxiously in-
sists you do something that actually would be to your ad-
vantage. This puts you in a ‘‘can’t win’’ situation because
if you refuse to do what the person tells you, you end up
defeating yourself just in order to spite him or her. In con-
trast, if you do what the person tells you to do, you feel
had. Because you gave in to those pushy demands, you get
the feeling the individual controlled you, and this robs you
of self-respect. No one likes to be coerced.

For example, Mary is a woman in her late teens who was
referred to us by her parents after many years of depression.
Mary was a real ‘‘hibernator,’’ and had the capacity to sit
alone in her room watching TV soap operas for months at
a time. This was due in part to her irrational belief that she
looked ‘‘peculiar,’’ and that people would stare at her if
she went out in public, and also by her feeling of being
coerced by her domineering mother. Mary admitted that
doing things might help her feel better, but this would mean
giving in to her mother, who kept telling her to get off her
duff and do something. The harder Mom pushed, the more
stubbornly Mary resisted.

It is an unfortunate fact of human nature that it can be
extremely difficult to do something when you sense you are
being forced into it. Fortunately, it’s very easy to learn how
to handle people who nag and harangue you and try to run

FEELING GOOD 119

your life. Suppose you are Mary, and after thinking things
over, you decide you would be better off if you got involved
in doing a number of things. You’ ve just made this decision
when your mother comes into your bedroom and announces,
‘*Don’t you lie around any longer! Your life is going down
the drain. Get moving! Get involved in things the way the
other girls your age do!’’ At that moment, in spite of the
fact that you already have decided to do just that, you
develop a tremendous aversion to it!

The disarming technique is an assertive method that will
solve this problem for you (other applications of this verbal
maneuver will be described in the next chapter). The essence
of the disarming technique is to agree with your mother,
but to do so in a way that you remind her you are agreeing
with her based on your own decision, and not because she
was telling you what to do. So, you might answer this way:
““Yes, Mom, I just thought the situation over myself and
decided it would be to my advantage to get moving on
things. Because of my own decision, I’m going to do it.’”’
Now you can start doing things and not feel had. Or if you
wish to put more of a barb in your comments, you can
always say, ““Yes, Mom, I have in fact decided to get out
of bed in spite of the fact that you’ve been telling me to!”’

Visualize Success. A powerful self-motivation method
involves making a list of the advantages of a productive
action you’ve been avoiding because it requires more self-
discipline than you have been able to muster. Such a list
will train you to look at the positive consequences of doing
it. It’s only human to go after what you want. Furthermore,
clubbing yourself into effective action doesn’t usually work
nearly as well as a fat, fresh carrot.

Suppose, for example, you want to quit smoking. You
may be reminding yourself about cancer and all the other
dangers of smoking. These fear tactics make you so nervous
that you immediately reach for another cigarette; they don’t
work. Here’s a three-step method that does work.

120 David D. Burns, M.D.

The first step is to make a list of all the positive conse-
quences that will result when you become a nonsmoker.
List as many as you can think of, including:

1. Improved health.
2. [ll respect myself.

3. [ll have greater self-discipline. With my new self-
confidence, I may be able to do a whole lot of other
things I’ve been putting off.

4. I will be able to run and dance actively, and still feel
good about my body. I'll have lots of stamina and
extra energy.

5. My lungs and heart will become strong. My blood
pressure will go down.

. My breath will be fresh.
. Pll have extra spending money.
. Pl live longer.

Oo con Nn

. The air around me will be clean.

10. I'll be able to tell people that I’ve become a non-
smoker.

Once you have prepared the list, you’re ready for the
second step. Every night before you go to sleep, fantasize
you are in your favorite spot—walking through the woods
in the mountains, on a crisp autumn day, or maybe lying
on a quiet beach near a crystal-blue ocean, with the sun
warming your skin. Whatever fantasy you choose, visualize
every enjoyable detail as vividly as possible, and let your
body relax and let go. Allow every muscle to unwind. Let
the tension flow out of your arms and legs and leave your
body. Notice how your muscles begin to feel limp and loose.
Notice ow peaceful you feel. Now you are ready for the
third step.

Fantasize that you are still in that scene, and you have

FEELING GOOD 12!

become a nonsmoker. Go through your list of benefits and
repeat each one to yourself in the following way: ‘‘Now I
have improved health and I like it. I can run along the beach,
and I want this. The air around me is clean and fresh, and
I feel good about myself. I respect myself. Now I have
greater self-discipline, and I can take on other challenges
if | want to. I have extra spending money,”’’ etc.

This method of habit management through the power of
positive suggestion works amazingly well. It enabled me
and many of my patients to quit smoking after a single
treatment session. You can do it easily, and you’ll find it’s
well worth your efforts. It can be used for self-improvement
in losing weight, lawn mowing, getting up on time in the
morning, adhering to a jogging routine, or for any other
habit you’d like to modify.

Count What Counts. A three-year-old boy named Stevie
stood by the edge of the children’s pool, afraid to jump in.
His mother sat in the water in front of him, urging him to
take the leap. He held back; she cajoled. The power struggle
went on for thirty minutes. Finally, he jumped. The water
felt fine. It wasn’t so difficult, and there was actually nothing
to fear. But his mother’s efforts backfired. The unfortunate
message imprinted on Stevie’s mind was ‘‘I have to be
pushed before I can do anything risky. I don’t have the
gumption to jump in on my own like the other kids.’’ His
mother and father got the same idea; they began to think,
‘*Left to his own devices, Stevie would never dare go into
the water at all. If he isn’t constantly pushed, he’ll do
nothing by himself. Raising him is going to be a long, hard
struggle.’’

Sure enough, as Stevie grew up, the drama was repeated
over and over. He had to be persuaded and pushed to go
to school, to join the baseball team, to go to parties, and
so on. He rarely initiated any action on his own. By the
time he was referred to me at age twenty-one, he was chron-
ically depressed, living with his parents, and not doing much

122 David D. Burns, M.D.

with his life. He was still waiting around for people to tell
him what to do and how to do it. But by now his parents
were fed up trying to motivate him.

After each therapy session, he would leave the office
charged with my enthusiasm to follow through on whatever
self-help assignment we had discussed. For example, one
week he decided to smile or say hello to three people he
didn’t know as a small first step in breaking his isolation.
But the next week he would come into my office with a
drooping head and a sheepish look that let me know he had
‘*forgotten’’ to say hello to anyone. Another week, his
assignment was to read a three-page article I had written
for a singles magazine on how an unmarried man learned
to overcome his loneliness. Steve came back the next week
and said he had lost the manuscript before having a chance
to read it. Each week as he left, he would feel a great surge
of eagerness to help himself, but by the time he was in the
elevator, he would ‘‘know’’ in his heart of hearts that the
week’s assignment, however simple, would just be too hard
to do!

What was Stevie’s problem? The explanation goes back
to that day at the swimming pool. He still carries in his
mind the powerfully imprinted idea that ‘‘I really can’t do
anything on my own. I’m the kind of guy who’s got to be
pushed.’’ Because it never occurred to him to challenge this
belief, it continued to function as a self-fulfilling prophecy,
and he had over fifteen years of procrastination to back up
his belief that he ‘‘really was’’ like that.

What was the solution? First Stevie had to become aware
of the two mental errors that were the key to his problem:
mental filter and labeling. His mind was dominated by
thoughts about the various things he put off doing, and he
ignored the hundreds of things he did each week that did
not involve his being pushed by someone else.

‘‘All--of that is well and good,’’ Stevie said after we
discussed this. ““You seem to have explained my problem,
and I think that’s correct. But how can I change the situ-
ation?”’

FEELING GOOD 123

The solution turned out to be simpler than he anticipated.
I suggested he obtain a wrist counter (as discussed in the
last chapter), so that each day he could count the things he
did on his own without prodding or encouragement from
anyone. At the end of the day he was to write down the
total number of clicks he scored and keep a daily log.

Over a several-week period, he began to notice that his
daily score increased. Every time he clicked the counter,
he reminded himself that he was in control of his life, and
in this way he trained himself to notice what he did do.
Stevie began to feel increased self-confidence, and to view
himself as a more capable human being.

Does it sound simple? It is! Will it work for you? You
probably don’t think so. But why not put it to the test? If
you have a negative reaction and are convinced the wrist
counter won’t work for you, why not evaluate your pessi-
mistic prediction with an experiment? Learn to count what
counts; you may be surprised at the results!

Test Your “‘Can'ts.*’ An important key to successful self-
activation involves learning to adopt a scientific attitude
toward the self-defeating predictions you make about your
performance and abilities. If you put these pessimistic
thoughts to the test, you can discover what the truth is.

One common self-defeating thought pattern when you are
depressed or procrastinating is to ‘‘can’t’’ yourself every
time you think of something productive to do. Perhaps this
stems from your fear of being blamed for your do-
nothingism. You try to save face by creating the illusion
that you are just too inadequate and incompetent to do a
single thing. The problem with defending your lethargy in
this manner is that you may really start believing what you
are telling yourself! If you say, ‘‘I can’t,’’ over and over
often enough it becomes like a hypnotic suggestion, and
after a while you become genuinely convinced you really
are a paralytic invalid who can’t do anything. Typical
‘‘can’t’’ thoughts include: ‘‘I can’t cook,’’ ‘‘I can’t func-
tion,’’ ‘‘I can’t work,’’ ‘‘I can’t concentrate,’’ ‘‘I can’t

124 David D. Burns, M.D.

read,’’ ‘‘I can’t get out of bed,’’ and ‘‘I can’t clean my
apartment. ”’

Not only do such thoughts defeat you, they will sour your
relationships with those you love because they will see all
your ‘‘I can’t’’ statements as annoying whining. They won't
perceive that it really looks and seems impossible for you
to do anything. They will nag you, and set up frustrating
power struggles with you.

An extremely successful cognitive technique involves
testing your negative predictions with actual experiments.
Suppose, for example, you’ve been telling yourself: ‘‘I’m
so upset I can’t concentrate well enough to read anything
at all.’’ As a way of testing this hypothesis, sit down with
today’s newspaper and read one sentence, and then see if
you can summarize the sentence out loud. You might then
predict—*‘But I could never read and understand a whole
paragraph.’’ Again—put this to the test. Read a paragraph
and summarize. Many severe, chronic depressions have
been cracked open with this powerful method.

The “Can't Lose’ System. You may feel hesitant to put
your “‘can’ts’’ to the test because you don’t want to run the
risk of failure. If you don’t run any risks, at least you can
maintain the secret belief that you’re basically a terrific
person who’s decided for the time being not to get involved.
Behind your aloofness and lack of commitment lurks a pow-
erful sense of inadequacy and the fear of failure.

The ‘‘Can’t Lose’’ System will help you combat this fear.
Make a list of the negative consequences you might have
to deal with if you took a risk and actually did fail. Then
expose the distortions in your fears, and show how you
could cope productively even if you did experience a dis-
appointment.

The venture that you have been avoiding may involve a
financial, personal, or scholastic risk. Remember that even
if you do fail, some good can come from it. After all, this
is how you learned how to walk. You didn’t just jump up

FEELING GOOD 125

from your crib one day and waltz gracefully across the room.
You stumbled and fell on your face and got up and tried
again. At what age are you suddenly expected to know
everything and never make any more mistakes? If you can
love and respect yourself in failure, worlds of adventure
and new experiences will open up before you, and your
fears will vanish. An example of a written ‘‘Can’t Lose’’
System is shown in Figure 5-10.

Don’t Put the Cart Before the Horse!

Pll bet you still may not know for sure where motivation
comes from. What, in your opinion, comes first—motiva-
tion or action?

If you said motivation, you made an excellent, logical
choice. Unfortunately, you’re wrong. Motivation does not
come first, action does! You have to prime the pump. Then
you will begin to get motivated, and the fluids will flow
spontaneously.

Individuals who procrastinate frequently confuse moti-
vation and action. You foolishly wait until you feel in the
mood to do something. Since you don’t feel like doing it,
you automatically put it off.

Your error is your belief that motivation comes first, and
then leads to activation and success. But it is usually the
other way around; action must come first, and the motivation
comes later on.

Take this chapter, for example. The first draft of this
chapter was overwritten, clumsy, and stale. It was so long
and boring that a true procrastinator would never even have
the fortitude to read it. The task of revising it seemed to
me like trying to go swimming with concrete shoes. When
the day I had scheduled for revising it came—I had to push
myself to sit down and get started. My motivation was about
| percent, and my urge to avoid the task was 99 percent.
What a hideous chore!

Figure 5-10. The “Can't Lose” System. A housewife used this
technique to overcome her fear of applying for a part-time job.

Negative Consequences of

Being Turned Down
for a Job

1. This means I'll never get a

job.

. My husband will look
down on me.

. But what if he’s not sym-
pathetic? He might say this
shows I belong in_ the
kitchen and don’t have
what it takes.

. But we’re nearly broke. We
need the money.

. If I don’t get a job, I won't
be able to afford some de-
cent new school clothes for
the kids. They’ll look

scraggly.

. A lot of my friends have
jobs. They’!l see I can’t cut
the mustard in the business
world.

Positive Thoughts and
Coping Strategies

. Overgeneralization. This is

unlikely. I can test this by
applying for a series of
other jobs and putting my
best foot forward to see
what happens.

. Fortune teller error. Ask

him. Maybe he will be
sympathetic.

. Point out to him I’m doing

my best and that his reject-
ing attitude doesn’t help.
Tell him that I am disap-
pointed, but that I credit
myself for trying.

. We’ve survived so far and

haven’t missed a single
meal.

. [can get some clothes later

on. We’ll have to learn to
get along with what we
have for a while. Happiness
doesn’t come from clothes
but from our self-respect.

. They’re not all employed,

and even my friends who
do have jobs can probably
remember a time when they
were out of work. They
haven’t done anything so
far to indicate they look
down on me.

FEELING GOOD 127

After I got involved in the task, I became highly moti-
vated, and the job seems easy now. Writing became fun
after all! It works like this:

First: Action

Second: Motivation <—
{

Third: More Action

If you are a procrastinator, you probably aren’t aware of
this. So you lie around in bed waiting for inspiration to
strike. When someone suggests you do something, you
whine, ‘‘I don’t feel like it.”’ Well, who said you were
supposed to feel like it? If you wait until you’re ‘‘in the
mood,’” you may wait forever!

The following table will help you review the various
activation techniques and select what’s most helpful to you.

"sIOIIO WIM ose NOA Udy
pue suoje ose noA uaym s0udL
-adxa nod uonsejsyes penjoe ay)
ssedwiod ‘9q [jim Aous Surpsemas
Moy wIpad pue  ‘uoNde

“SBS JO YIMOIS JeuOosiad Jo} jen “auoye as.noA uaym BulyjAue
-u9j0d 943 YIM SOIAOR a[npaudsS “p DUS BUNIPAd-ansevsjg “p  sulop ul yutod ou s,asayy j3aj NOX ‘p
‘DSIIA
JIA JOU “UOTIDB SMO[[O} UONBANOU
yey} Wes] NOX “nod azATesed yeu) s}ysnoyy, [euon ‘*ZUIYIOU OP 0}
SJYSNOY) [BOIZOT][! 24) asodxa nox ‘¢ -ounysXq jo plooay Apieq “¢  a8in ayy Aq pouljaymsaao [aaj NOX ‘“¢
JS) 94) 0) ‘BUIPJEMIIUN PUP I[NOUJIP 00} WIS

suonoipaid sanedau unok ynd nox °Z = 3994S UONeUNSBIDOIdHUY oY “Z SySe) asned0q aleuNseID0Id Nox °z
‘Aoenbopeur jo asuas

INOA INdJapuN [JIM pue pag UI BULA]

ueyi Joy9qQ [99} NOA syeUu [TIM

Awanoe Aue Ayjenuia ~“ainsead ‘SpudyooM UO polog

pue AJajsew Jo JUNOW 9Y) P1099 pue Ajouo] 193 nox ‘op oO} BuIlOU

pue out] & Je INOY DUO SZUIY) Ue “| aynpsyos AAnoy Ajleq “[ saey NOX ‘poziuesiosip [33] nox ‘|

eee
poylap ayi fo asoding sanbiuyoa  uolpanoy-fJasS swojduks jasav J

Re Se aS SoS aS SSS Sf Us SS fe Sc SS ie SP sg ee pA

SPOUJBW UONPAHOW-}3G jO SISdOUAG “4~G a1qeL

‘OP isn NOK yeyM UeYy
JIYyIV] OP 0} JDM NOK yeUM JO
SUIS) UT YU) 0} UIS9q UBD NOK
os Ayiagoe Aue jo sasejueape
-SIP puke SaseIURAPE dU) ISI] NOX “q
‘suonoNAsUT Jyosmmod Ja1B Nod
udyM ..SIysNo,, pue , ‘sIsNu,,
«< Spfnoys,, deus nox ‘e

“owTy & 18 dojs
U0 aS9yj OP pure ‘syed yuguOdUIOD
AUN) Si OJUI UMOP, Yse} ay) Yeag

(SOLL) suoniusos sur

~JaJ19jUI-YsB} JO} (COOL) suonsu
-309 PdjUdLIO-Ysel sINIWSqns NOX

‘Aep yora ysijduiosoe op nod
SUI) JO ISI] B Oye ,, SuULyUIIp
SUIYJOU-10-[]B,, SB YONS ‘SUID
-yed YsNOY PoVOIsIP JO} YOO]
"Wsy) 0} yoVq ye} pue sJusnoW
SUIUMOP-J[9S 94} UMOP BLM

“spenngal
onsiyeal WM , sing,, INO Sunyeq
-W0d Aq ,.JNG,, INOA JJo 108 NOX

UOID1907) INOY A UONRADOP

199-4 [INT Jo} sdarg apy

anbiuysa] QOL-OLL ©

JUSWISIOPUA-J[IS

jeungoy-ing

‘punog-Aynp pue ‘past;qo
‘possaiddo ‘Ajyin3 jaa} no,

‘op
0} Savy NOA BuIyjAIDAD JO opnjtU
-3eu oy} AQ PowW]syMIdAO [99] NOL

‘JoUUBL BUTVeaJap
-J[9S @ Ul ySe} Be ynoge yuIU) NOX

‘YON YOM 1,USI Op NOA
JOAaeyM 1BY) BSP ay) JARY NOX

“SSUIy) SUIPIOA®
JO} SasNdxd JjasinoA dais’? NOX

‘awn JO peoye ASayens 3uidos e
dojaaap puv sine} Jo saduonbes
-u0d sayesou AUe UMOP JIL

‘suoyoipaid sanedgou Ino sa0jd
-SIp pue osuqeyo nok yorum
ul juowLiodxa ue dn jas nox

“satoenb
-opeut nod uo Buljamp ApueIs
-UOD JO JIqey peg INCA SWIOdIBAO
nod sdjay sity] “19)UN0d JsuM B
SUISN ‘SANENIUL UMO INOK UO Aep
yors op no ssuly) oy) JUNOD NOX

‘uonexev]as deap jo 97e)s B Suronp
-Ul JayJB SOU} SZIPENSIA NOX “WQeY
oy) posuvys Zulaey jo siyauaq
SAIISOd dy} JO ISI] B SywWE NOL

‘SULJUIY) UMO INOA Bulop Jo a]Ged
-B9 ae NOA Jey) Wd) PUD! pue

vl

tl

‘Cl

Tl

WY) WM solse A[DAIOSse NOX ‘OI

poylap ayi fo asoding

WOISAS ,.dSO'] },UBD,, ‘PI

S},UBD) INOX IS] EC]

SJUNOD UA IUNOD ‘ZI

SSIDING IZYeNsiA “[|

onbiuyso], Sulwuesiq ‘O]

Sanbiuyda] uonvanoy-fjas

‘Suryjou

YSU NOA OS ‘]Iey O) plese ase NOX
), ued

I,, ‘Aes noA asnedaq juajad

-WOSUI pue ayenbopeul jaaj nox

., JOWeuNsesso0ld B, se Jfasinod 3as
noA asneseq sANeNIUT UMO INOA
uO SUIYJAUR OP 0} J]QeUN [39j NOX

“SULYOWS SB YONs y1qQeYy
B SurAjipow AyNoyIp saey nox

"ye ye suru
-Aue Op 0} aSnjal nod os ‘[NnUIs
-d1 pue painssaid ja0j nox “nod

‘bl

‘tl

‘Cl

TT

sondupsey pue sseu as[a UOSWIOS “Q]
aN

SUOIAUKS 1a84D]

ner
WUOS "L—-G aIqeL

Chapter 6

Verbal Judo:
Learn to Talk Back When You're
Under the Fire of Criticism

You are learning that the cause of your sense of worthless-
ness is your ongoing self-criticism. This takes the form of
an upsetting internal conversation in which you constantly
harangue and persecute yourself in a harsh, unrealistic man-
ner. Frequently your inner criticism will be triggered by
someone else’s sharp remark. You may dread criticism sim-
ply because you have never learned effective techniques for
handling it. Because it ts relatively easy to do, I want to
emphasize the importance of mastering the art of handling
verbal abuse and disapproval nondefensively and without a
loss of self-esteem.

Many depressive episodes are set in motion by external
criticism. Even psychiatrists, who are supposedly profes-
sional abuse-takers, can react adversely to criticism. A psy-
chiatric resident called Art received negative feedback
intended to be helpful from his supervisor. A patient had
complained that several comments Art made during a ther-
apy session were abrasive. The resident reacted with a wave
of panic and depression when he heard this, due to his
thought, “‘Oh God! The truth ts out about me. Even my

13]

132 David D. Burns, M.D.

patients can see what a worthless, insensitive person I am.
They’ ll probably kick me out of the residency program and
drum me out of the state.”’

Why is criticism so hurtful to some people, while others
Can remain unperturbed in the face of the most abusive
attack? In this chapter you will learn the secrets of people
who face disapproval fearlessly, and you will be shown
specific, concrete steps to overcome and eliminate your own
exquisite vulnerability to criticism. As you read the follow-
ing sections, keep this in mind: Overcoming your fear of
criticism will require a moderate amount of practice. But it
is not difficult to develop and master this skill, and the
positive impact on your self-esteem will be tremendous.

Before I show you the way out of the trap of crumbling
inwardly when criticized, let me show you why criticism is
more upsetting to some people than to others. In the first
place, you must realize that it is not other people, or the
critical comments they make, that upset you. To repeat,
there has never been a single time in your life when the
critical comments of some other person upset you—even to
a small extent. No matter how vicious, heartless, or cruel
these comments may be, they have no power to disturb you
or to create even a little bit of discomfort.

After reading that paragraph you may get the impression
that I am cracking up, mistaken, highly unrealistic, or some
combination thereof. But I assure you I am not when I say:
Only one person in this world has the power to put you
down—and you are that person, no one else!

Here’s how it works. When another person criticizes you,
certain negative thoughts are automatically triggered in your
head. Your emotional reaction will be created by these
thoughts and not by what the other person says. The thoughts
which upset you will invariably contain the same types of
mental errors described in Chapter 3: overgeneralization,
all-or-nothing thinking, the mental filter, labeling, etc.

For example, let’s take a look at Art’s thoughts. His panic
was the result of his catastrophic interpretation: ‘‘This crit-
icism shows how worthless I am.’’ What mental errors is

FEELING GOOD = 133

he making? In the first place, Art 1s jumping to conclusions
when he arbitrarily concludes the patient’s criticism is valid
and reasonable. This may or may not be the case. Further-
more, he iS exaggerating the importance of whatever he
actually said to the patient that may have been undiplomatic
(magnification), and he is assuming he could do nothing to
correct any errors in his behavior (the fortune teller error).
He unrealistically predicted he would be rejected and ruined
professionally because he would repeat endlessly whatever
error he made with this one patient (overgeneralization). He
focused exclusively on his error (the mental filter) and over-
looked his numerous other therapeutic successes (disqual-
ifying or overlooking the positive). He identified with his
erroneous behavior and concluded he was a ‘‘worthless and
insensitive human being’’ (labeling).

The first step in Overcoming your fear of criticism con-
cerns your Own mental processes: Learn to identify the neg-
ative thoughts you have when you are being criticized. It
will be most helpful to write them down using the double-
column technique described in the two previous chapters.
This will enable you to analyze your thoughts and recognize
where your thinking is illogical or wrong. Finally, write
down rational responses that are more reasonable and less
upsetting.

An excerpt from Art’s written homework using the dou-
ble-column technique is included (Figure 6—1). As he
learned to think about the situation in a more realistic man-
ner, he stopped wasting mental and emotional effort in ca-
tastrophizing, and was able to channel his energy into
creative, goal-oriented problem solving. After evaluating
precisely what he had said that was offensive or hurtful, he
was able to take steps to modify his clinical style with
patients so as to minimize future similar mistakes. As a
result, he learned from the situation, and his clinical skills
and maturity increased. This gave his self-confidence a boost
and helped him overcome his fear of being imperfect.

To put it succinctly, if people criticize you the comments
they make will be right or wrong. If the comments are

134 David D. Burns, M.D.

Figure 6—1. Excerpt from Art’s written homework, using the dou-
ble-column technique. He initially experienced a wave of panic
when he received critical feedback from his supervisor about the
way he handled a difficult patient. After writing down his negative
thoughts, he realized they were quite unrealistic. Consequently,
he felt substantial relief.

Rational Responses
(SELF-DEFENSE)

Automatic Thoughts
(SELF-CRITICISM)

1. Oh, God! The truth is out |. Just because one patient

about me. Even the patients
can see what a worthless,
insensitive individual I am.

complains it doesn’t mean
that I am a ‘“‘worthless, in-
sensitive individual.’’ The

majority of my patients do,
in fact, like me. Making a
mistake doesn’t reveal my
‘true essence.’’ Everyone
is entitled to make mis-
takes.

2. They’ll probably kick me 2. This is silly and rests on
out of the residency pro- several erroneous assump-
gram. tions: (a) all I do is bad

things; (b) I have no capac-
ity to grow. Since (a) and
(b) are absurd, it is ex-
tremely unlikely my _ posi-
tion here is threatened. I
have on many occasions re-
ceived praise from my su-
pervisor.

wrong, there is really nothing for you to be upset about.
Think about that for a minute! Many patients have come to
me in tears, angry and upset because a loved one made a
critical comment to them that was thoughtless and inaccur-
ate. Such a reaction is unnecessary. Why should you be
disturbed if someone else makes the mistake of criticizing
you in an unjust manner? That’s the other guy’s error, not
yours. Why upset yourself? Did you expect that other people
would be perfect? On the other hand, if the criticism is

FEELING GOOD 135

accurate, there is still no reason for you to feel over-
whelmed. You’re not expected to be perfect. Just acknowl-
edge your error and take whatever steps you can to correct
it. It sounds simple (and it is!), but it may take some effort
to transform this insight into an emotional reality.

Of course, you may fear criticism because you feel you
need the love and approval of other people in order to be
worthwhile and happy. The problem with this point of view
is that you’ll have to devote all your energies to trying to
please people, and you won’t have much left for creative,
productive living. Paradoxically, many people may find you
less interesting and desirable than your more self-assured
friends.

Thus far, what I have told you is a review of the cognitive
techniques introduced in the previous chapter. The crux of
the matter is that only your thoughts can upset you and if
you learn to think more realistically, you will feel less upset.
Right now, write down the negative thoughts that ordinarily
go through your head when someone criticizes you. Then
identify the distortions and substitute more objective rational
responses. This will help you feel less angry and threatened.

Now I would like to teach you some simple verbal tech-
niques which may have considerable practical relevance.
What can you say when someone is attacking you? How
can you handle these difficult situations in a way that will
enhance your sense of mastery and self-confidence?

Step One—Empathy. When someone is criticizing or
attacking you, his (or her) motives may be to help you or
to hurt you. What the critic says may be right or wrong, or
somewhere in between. But it is not wise to focus on these
issues initially. Instead, ask the person a series of specific
questions designed to find out exactly what he or she means.
Try to avoid being judgmental or defensive as you ask the
questions. Constantly ask for more and more specific in-
formation. Attempt to see the world through the critic’s
eyes. If the person attacks you with vague, insulting labels,
ask him or her to be more specific and to point out exactly

136 David D. Burns, M.D.

what it is about you the person dislikes. This initial ma-
neuver can itself go a long way to getting the critic off your
back, and will help transform an attack-defense interaction
into one of collaboration and mutual respect.

I often illustrate how to do this in a therapy session by
role-playing an imaginary situation with the patient so that
I can model this particular skill. Pll show you how to role-
play; it’s a useful skill to develop. In the dialogue that
follows, I want you to imagine you are an angry critic. Say
the most brutal and upsetting thing to me you can think of.
What you say can be true, false, or partly both. I will respond
to each of your assaults with the empathy technique.

You (playing the role of angry critic): Dr. Burns,
you're a no-good shit.

Davip: What about me is shitty?

You: Everything you say and do. You’re insensitive,
self-centered, and incompetent.

Davip: Let’s take each of these. I want you to try to be
specific. Apparently I’ve done or said a number
of things that upset you. Just what did I say that
sounded insensitive? What gave you the impres-
sion I was self-centered? What did I do that
seemed incompetent?

You: When I called to change my appointment the
other day, you sounded rushed and irritable, as
if you were tn a big hurry and didn’t give a damn
about me.

Davip: Okay, I came across in a rushed, uncaring way
on the phone. What else have I done that irritated
you?

You: You always seem to hurry me out at the end of
the session—yust like this was a big production
line to make money.

Davip: Okay, you feel I’ve been too rushed during ses-
sions as well. I may have given you the impres-

FEELING GOOD 137

sion I’m more interested in your money than in
you. What else have I done? Can you think of
other ways I might have goofed up or offended
you?

What I am doing is simple. By asking you specific ques-
tions I minimize the possibility that you will reject me com-
pletely. You—-and I—become aware of some specific
concrete problems that we can deal with. Furthermore, |
am giving you your day in court by listening to you so as
to understand the situation as you see it. This tends to defuse
any anger and hostility and introduces a problem-solving
Orientation in the place of blame casting or debate. Re-
member the first rule—even if you feel the criticism is totally
unjust, respond with empathy by asking specific questions.
Find out precisely what your critic means. If the person is
very hot under the collar, he or she may be hurling labels
at you, perhaps even obscenities. Nevertheless, ask for more
information. What do those words mean? Why does the
person call you a ‘‘no-good shit’’? How did you offend this
individual? What did you do? When did you do it? How
often have you done it? What else does the person dislike
about you? Find out what your action means to him or her.
Try to see the world through your critic’s eyes. This ap-
proach will frequently calm the roaring lion and lay the
groundwork for a more sensible discussion.

Step Two—Disarming the Critic. If someone is shooting
at you, you have three choices: You can stand and shoot
back—this usually leads to warfare and mutual destruction;
you can run away or try to dodge the bullets—this often
results in humiliation and a loss of self-esteem; or you can
Stay put and skillfully disarm your opponent. I have found
that this third solution is by far the most satisfying. When
you take the wind out of the other person’s sails, you end
up the winner, and your Opponent more often than not will
also feel like a winner.

How is this accomplished? It’s simple: Whether your

138 David D. Burns, M.D.

critic is right or wrong, initially find some way to agree with
him or her. Let me illustrate the easiest situation first. Let’s
assume the critic is primarily correct. In the previous ex-
ample when you angrily accused me of sounding rushed
and indifferent on several occasions, I might go on to Say:
‘“You’re absolutely right. | was rushed when you called,
and I probably did sound impersonal. Other people have
also pointed this out to me at times. I want to emphasize
that I didn’t intend to hurt your feelings. You’re also nght
that we have been rushed during several of our sessions.
You might recall that sessions can be any length you like,
as long as we decide this ahead of time so that the scheduling
can be appropriately adjusted. Perhaps you’d like to sched-
ule sessions that are fifteen or thirty minutes longer, and
see if that’s more comfortable.’’

Now, suppose the person who’s attacking you ts making
criticisms you feel are unfair and not valid. What if it would
be unrealistic for you to change? How can you agree with
someone when you feel certain that what is being said is
utter nonsense? It’s easy—you can agree in principle with
the criticism, or you can find some grain of truth in the
statement and agree with that, or you can acknowledge that
the person’s upset is understandable because it is based on
how he or she views the situation. I can best illustrate this
by continuing the role-playing; you attack me, but this time
say things that are primarily false. According to the rules
of the game, I must (1) find some way to agree with whatever
you say; (2) avoid sarcasm or defensiveness; (3) always
speak the truth. Your statements can be as bizarre and as
ruthless as you like, and I guarantee I will stick by these
rules! Let’s go!

You —_ (continuing to play the role of angry critic): Dr.
Burns, you’re a shit.

Davib: I feel that way at times. I often goof up at things.
You: This cognitive therapy is no damn good!

FEELING GOOD 139

Davip: There’s certainly plenty of room for improve-
ment.

You: And you’re stupid.

Davip: There are lots of people who are brighter than |
am. I’m sure not the smartest person in the world.

You: You have no real feelings for your patients. Your
approach to therapy is superficial and gimmicky.

Davip: I’m not always as warm and open as I’d like to
be. Some of my methods might seem gimmicky
at first.

You: You’re not a real psychiatrist. This book is pure
trash. You’re not trustworthy or competent to
manage my case.

Davip: I’m terribly sorry | seem incompetent to you. It
must be quite disturbing to you. You seem to
find it difficult to trust me, and you are genuinely
skeptical about whether we can work together
effectively. You’re absolutely right—we can’t
work together successfully unless we have a
sense Of mutual respect and teamwork.

By this time (or sooner) the angry critic will usually lose
steam. Because I do not fight back but instead find a way
to agree with my opponent, the person quickly seems to run
out of ammunition, having been successfully disarmed. You
might think of this as winning by avoiding battle. As the
critic begins to calm down, he or she will be in a better
mood to communicate.

Once I have demonstrated these first two steps to a patient
in my Office, I usually propose we reverse roles to give the
patient the chance to master the method. Let’s do this. |
will criticize and attack you, and you will practice the em-
pathy and make up your own answers. Then see how closely
they are accurate or nonsensical. To make the following
dialogue a more useful exercise, cover up the responses
called ‘‘You’’ and make up your own answers. Then see

140 David D. Burns, M.D.

how closely they correspond with what I have written. Re-
member to ask questions using the empathy method and
find valid ways to agree with me using the disarming tech-
nique.

DavipD (playing the role of angry critic): You’re not here
to get better. You're just looking for sympathy.

You —_ (playing the role of the one under attack): What
gives you the impression I’m just looking for
sympathy?

DaviD: You don’t do anything to help yourself between
sessions. All you want to do is come here and
complain.

You: It’s true that I haven’t been doing some of the
written homework you suggested. Do you feel |
shouldn’t complain during sessions?

Davib: You can do whatever you want. Just admit you
don’t give a damn.

You: You mean you think I don’t want to get better,
or what?

DaviD: You’re no good! You’re just a piece of garbage!

You: I’ve been feeling that way for years! Do you have
some ideas about what I can do to feel differ-
ently?

Davip: I give up. You win.
You: You're right. I did win!

I strongly suggest you practice this with a friend. The
role-playing format wil! help you master the necessary skills
needed when a real situation arises. If there is no one you
feel comfortable with who could role-play with you effec-
tively, a good alternative would be to write out imaginary
dialogues between you and a hostile critic, similar to the
ones you’ve been reading. After each harangue write down
how you might answer using the empathy and disarming

FEELING GOOD 141

technique. It may seem difficult at first, but I think you’ll
catch on quite readily. It’s really quite easy once you get
the gist of it.

You will notice you have a profound, almost irresistible
tendency to defend yourself when you are unjustly accused.
This is a MAJOR mistake! If you give in to this tendency,
you will find that the intensity of your opponent’s attack
increases! You will paradoxically be adding bullets to that
person’s arsenal every time you defend yourself. For ex-
ample, you be the critic again, and this time I'll defend
myself against your absurd accusations. You’ll see how
quickly our interaction will escalate to full-scale warfare.

You (in the role of critic again): Dr. Burns, you don’t
care about your patients.

DaviD (responding in a defensive manner): That’s un-
true and unfair. You don’t know what you're
talking about! My patients respect all the hard
work I put in.

You: Well, here’s one who doesn’t! Good-bye! (You
exit, having decided to fire me. My defensive-
ness leads to a total loss.)

In contrast, if I respond with empathy and disarm your
hostility, more often than not you will feel I am listening
to you and respecting you. As a result you lose your ardor
to do battle and quiet down. This paves the way for step
three—feedback and negotiation.

You may find initially that in spite of your determination
to apply these techniques, when a real situation arises in
which you are criticized, you will be caught up by your
emotions and your old behavior patterns. You may find
yourself sulking, arguing, defending yourself vehemently,
etc. This is understandable. You’re not expected to learn it
all overnight, and you don’t have to win every battle. It is
important, however, to analyze your mistakes afterward so
that you can review how you might have handled the sit-

142 David D. Burns, M.D.

uation differently along the lines suggested. It can be im-
mensely helpful to find a friend to role-play the difficult
situation with you afterward so that you can practice a va-
riety of responses until you have mastered an approach you
are comfortable with.

Step Three—feedback and Negotiation. Once you
have listened to your critic, using the empathy method, and
disarmed him by finding some way to agree with him, you
will then be in a position to explain your position and emo-
tions tactfully but assertively, and to negotiate any real dif-
ferences.

Let’s assume that the critic is just plain wrong. How can
you express this in a nondestructive manner? This is simple:
You can express your point of view objectively with an
acknowledgment you might be wrong. Make the conflict
one based on fact rather than personality or pride. Avoid
directing destructive labels at your critic. Remember, his
error does not make him stupid, worthless, or inferior.

For example, a patient recently claimed that I sent a bill
for a session for which she had already paid. She assaulted
me with ‘‘Why don’t you get your bookkeeping straight!’’
Knowing she was in error, I responded, ‘“‘My records may
indeed be wrong. I seem to recall that you forgot your
checkbook that day, but I might be confused on this point.
I hope you’ll allow for the possibility that you or I will
make errors at times. Then we can be more relaxed with
each other. Why not see if you have a canceled check? That
way we can find out the truth and make appropriate ad-
justments.’’

In this case my nonpolarizing response allowed her to
save face and avoided a confrontation in which her self-
respect was at risk. Although it turned out she was wrong,
she later expressed relief that I acknowledged I do make
mistakes. This helped her feel better about me, as she was
afraid I would be as perfectionistic and demanding with her
as she was with herself.

Sometimes you and the critic will differ not on a matter

FEELING GOOD 143

of fact but of taste. Once again, you will be a winner if you
present your point of view with diplomacy. For example, I
have found that no matter how I dress, some patients respond
favorably and some negatively. I feel most comfortable in
a Suit and tie, or in a Sports coat and tie. Suppose a patient
criticizes me because my clothes are too formal and this is
iritating because it makes me appear to be part of the ‘‘Es-
tablishment.’’ After eliciting further specific information
about other things this person might dislike about me, I
could then respond, ‘‘I can certainly agree with you that
suits are a bit formal. You would be more comfortable with
me if I dressed more casually. I’m sure you’ll understand
that after dressing in a variety of ways, I have found that a
nice suit or sports coat is most acceptable to the majority
of the people I work with, and that’s why I’ve decided to
stick with this style of dressing. I’m hopeful you won’t let
this interfere with our continued work together.’’

You have a number of options when you negotiate with
the critic. If he or she continues to harangue you, making
the same point again and again, you can simply repeat your
assertive response politely but firmly over and over until
the person tires out. For example, if my critic continued to
insist I stop wearing suits, | might continue to say each
time, “‘I understand your point entirely, and there is some
truth to it. Nevertheless, I’ve decided to stick with more
formal attire at this time.’’

Sometimes the solution will be in between. In this case
negotiation and compromise are indicated. You may have
to settle for part of what you want. But if you have con-
scientiously applied the empathy and disarming techniques
first, you will probably get more of what you want.

In many cases you will be just plain wrong, and the critic
will be right. In such a situation your critic’s respect for
you will probably increase by an orbital jump if you asser-
tively agree with the criticism, thank the person for pro-
viding you with the information, and apologize for any hurt
you might have caused. It sounds like old-fashioned com-
mon sense (and it is), but it can be amazingly effective.

144 David D. Burns, M.D.

By now you may be saying, ““But don’t I have a right
to defend myself when someone criticizes me? Why should
I always have to empathize with the other person? After all,
he may be the ninny, not I. Isn’t it human just to get angry
and blow your stack? Why should I always have to smooth
things out?’’

Well, there is considerable truth in what you say. You
do have the right to defend yourself vigorously from criti-
cism and to get angry at anyone you choose whenever you
like. And you are right on target when you point out that
it is often your critic, and not you, whose thinking ts fouled
up. And there is more than a grain of truth behind the slogan
‘*Better mad than sad.’’ After all, if you’re going to con-
clude that someone is “‘no damn good,’’ why not let it be
the other fellow? And furthermore, sometimes it does feel
so much better to be mad at the other person.

Many psychotherapists would agree with you on this
point. Freud felt that depression was ‘‘anger turned in-
ward.’’ In other words he believed depressed individuals
direct their rage against themselves. In keeping with this
view, many therapists urge their patients to get in touch
with their anger and to express it more frequently to others.
They might even say that some of the methods described
in this section amount to a repressive cop-out.

This ts a false tissue. The crucial point is not whether or
not you express your feelings, but the manner tn which you
do it. If your message 1s ‘‘I’m angry because you’re criti-
cizing me and you're no damn good,”’ you will poison your
relationship with that person. If you defend yourself from
negative feedback in a defensive and vengeful way, you
will reduce the prospect for productive interaction in the
future. Thus, while your angry outburst momentarily feels
good, you may defeat yourself in the long run by burning
your bridges. You have polarized the situation prematurely
and unnecessarily, and eliminated your chance to learn what
the critic was trying to convey. And what is worse, you
may experience a depressive backlash and punish yourself
inordinately for your burst of temper.

FEELING GOOD 145

Antiheckler Technique. A specialized application of the
techniques discussed in this chapter might be particularly
helpful for those of you who are involved in lecturing or
teaching. I developed the ‘‘antiheckler technique’’ when I
began lecturing to university and professional groups on
current depression research. Although my lectures are usu-
ally well received, I occasionally find there is a single heck-
ler in the audience. The heckler’s comments usually have
several characteristics: (1) They are intensely critical, but
seem inaccurate or irrelevant to the material presented; (2)
they often come from a person who is not well accepted or
regarded among his or her local peers; and (3) they are
expressed in a haranguing, abusive style.

I therefore had to develop an antiheckler technique which
I could use to silence such a person in an inoffensive man-
ner so that the rest of the audience could have an equal
opportunity to ask questions. I find that the following
method is highly effective: (1) I immediately thank the per-
son for his or her comments; (2) acknowledge that the
points brought up are indeed important; and (3) I empha-
size that there is a need for more knowledge about the
points raised, and I encourage my critic to pursue mean-
ingful research and investigation of the topic. Finally, I in-
vite the heckler to share his or her views with me further
after the close of the session.

Although no verbal technique is guaranteed to bring a
particular result, I have rarely failed to achieve a favorable
effect when using this upbeat approach. In fact, these heck-
ling individuals have frequently approached me after the
lecture to compliment and thank me for my kind comments.
It is sometimes the heckler who turns out to be most de-
monstrative and appreciative of my lecture!

Summary. The various cognitive and verbal principles
for coping with criticism are summarized in the accompa-
nying diagram (see Figure 6-2, page 146). As a general
rule, when someone insults you, you will immediately go
down one of three pathways—the sad route, the mad route,
or the glad route. Whichever option you choose will be a

"urejduios sty paypuey nod moy
YM payshes si ssog INO, “UOHBAD|S
POOW! PUP W99}S9-j]aS JoUaLAdx9
nox ‘pesodoid st uoynyos eB pue

pouyap si wajqoid ay -aIWOOLNO

.¢H0 6uyoo6 useaq | aaey

SABM JeUAA,, ‘auinbul NOA
101IABYagG

, Buiyyawos wea;
O} BQUBYD B S,3J9H,,
yyBnoyL

AWUODNAY WaaAS7-[JAS

3iNIBS
:Bul
“(304

"ssoqg INOA YM Ciysuoneles in0A
pouosiod puke Surmjou pauses] noA
“poos UWep OU SI pjiom au} JjasunoA
Suljjay Apueysuos ‘sAep Joy awny nox

‘ods ay) UO pay ae NOX *AWOOLNO

‘payny aie suonesnooe
pure saijueosqg
JOIABYaG

payeysny
‘AuBuy
:Buyjae4

_juie6be yoeq Aw UO

$1 GOS pidnis yeuL..
2YyBNOYL

AUOdNAY | POOD) ON AL NOL

, Ajayey yo Buyoo6 pue
yom Addoys GBurlop uaag aanoA,, ‘shes
SSOQ JNOA :‘WSIDILLIND HLIM DNIdOD

"yuom ye voreqosd uo nd ase NOX “uOIS

-saidap Jo puesyoinb oy) oju! Jadoap
yuls NOA ‘UMOP JyISINOA Jnd puke ‘YOM

ploae “pag Ul at} ROA -“AWOOLNO

dn 6uraib
‘Buidow ‘uoiejos}
:JOIABYUaG

snoixue
‘pes
‘Buryjaey

ssejyom wy dn
Huyoob shemye wWj,,

uBnoYyL

asnadsay pood on uf

a a ATE CC CAAA TT TTT

‘JOS jeJUeW INOA Aq paeoueNyul Aees6 aq Osye {IM WOD}NO au} puke JOIAeYEG INO, “pe6 10 ‘pew ‘pes 499} jjIM
NOA ‘uoWenyIs au} jnoqe yUIUy NOA MOU UO Bulpuedeg ‘SION 0} joRe! UHI NOA yeu) SABM Basu) BUL “7-9 BuNBI4

FEELING GOOD 147

total experience, and will involve your thinking, your feel-
ings, your behavior, and even the way your body functions.

Most people with a tendency to depression choose the
sad route. You automatically conclude the critic is right.
Without any systematic investigation, you jump to the con-
clusion that you were in the wrong and made a mistake.
You then magnify the importance of the criticism with a
series of thinking errors. You might overgeneralize and
wrongly conclude that your whole life consists of nothing
but a string of errors. Or you might label yourself a ‘‘total
goof-up.’’ And because of your perfectionistic expectation
that you are supposed to be flawless, you will probably feel
convinced that your (presumed) error indicates you are
worthless. As a result of these mental errors, you will ex-
perience depression and a loss of self-esteem. Your verbal
responses will be ineffectual and passive, characterized by
avoidance and withdrawal.

In contrast, you may choose the mad route. You will
defend yourself from the horrors of being imperfect by trying
to convince the critic that he or she is a monster. You will
stubbornly refuse to admit any error because according to
your perfectionistic standards, this would be tantamount to
admitting you are a worthless worm. So you hurl accusations
back on the assumption that the best defense is a good
offense. Your heart beats rapidly, and hormones pour into
your bloodstream as you prepare for battle. Every muscle
tightens and your jaws are clenched. You may feel a tem-
porary exhilaration as you tell your critic off in self-righteous
indignation. You’ll show him what a no-good piece of crap
he is! Unfortunately, he doesn’t agree, and in the long run
your outburst is self-defeating because you’ ve poisoned the
relationship.

The third option requires that you either have self-esteem
or at least act as uf you did. It 1s based on the premise that
you are a worthwhile human being and have no need to be
perfect. When you are criticized, your initial response is
investigative. Does the criticism contain a grain of truth?

148 David D. Burns, M.D.

Just what did you do that was objectionable? Did you in
fact goof up?

Having defined the problem by asking a series of non-
judgmental questions, you are in a position to propose a
solution. If a compromise is indicated, you can negotiate.
If you were clearly in the wrong, you can admit it. If the
critic was mistaken, you can point this out in a tactful
manner. But whether your behavior was right or wrong,
you will know that you are right as a human being, because
you have finally perceived that your self-esteem was never
at issue in the first place.

Chapter 7

Feeling Angry? What's Your !Q?

What’s your IQ? I’m not interested in knowing how smart
you are because your intelligence has little, if anything, to
do with your capacity for happiness. What I want to know
is what your /rritability Quotient 1s. This refers to the amount
of anger and annoyance you tend to absorb and harbor in
your daily life. If you have a particularly high IQ, it puts
you at a great disadvantage because you overreact to frus-
trations and disappointments by creating feelings of re-
sentment that blacken your disposition and make your life
a joyless hassle.

Here’s how to measure your IQ. Read the list of twenty-
five potentially upsetting situations described below. In the
space provided after each incident, estimate the degree it
would ordinarily anger or provoke you, using this simple
rating scale:

O—You would feel very little or no annoyance.
I1—You would feel a little irritated.

2—-You would feel moderately upset.

3—You would feel quite angry.

4—You would feel very angry.

Mark your answer after each question as in this example:

149

150 David D. Burns, M.D.

You are driving to pick up a friend at the airport,
and you are forced to wait for a long freight train.
2

The individual who answered this question estimated his
reaction as a two because he would feel moderately irritated,
but this would quickly pass as soon as the train was gone.
As you describe how you would ordinarily react to each of
the following provocations, make your best general estimate
even though many potentially important details are omitted
(such as what kind of day you were having, who was in-
volved in the situation, etc.).

Novaco Anger Scale*

I.

2.

You unpack an appliance you have just bought, plug
it in, and discover that it doesn’t work.

Being overcharged by a repairman who has you over
a barrel.

Being singled out for correction, when the actions
of others go unnoticed.

Getting your car stuck in the mud or snow.

You are talking to someone and they don’t answer
you.

Someone pretends to be something they are not.

. While you are struggling to carry four cups of coffee

to your table at a cafeteria, someone bumps into you,
spilling the coffee.

You have hung up your clothes, but someone knocks
them to the floor and fails to pick them up.

*This scale was developed by Dr Raymond W. Novaco of the Program
in Social Ecology at the University of California, Irvine, and part of it is
reproduced here with his permission. The full scale contains eighty items.

Ht.
12.

20.

21.

22.
23.

FEELING GOOD 151

. You are hounded by a salesperson from the moment

that you walk into a store.

. You have made arrangements to g0 somewhere with

a person who backs off at the last minute and leaves
you hanging. —____
Being joked about or teased.

Your car ts stalled at a traffic light, and the guy
behind you keeps blowing his horn.

. You accidentally make the wrong kind of turn in a

parking lot. As you get out of your car someone yells
at you, ““Where did you learn to drive?’’

. Someone makes a mistake and blames it on you.

. You are trying to concentrate, but a person near you

is tapping their foot.

. You lend someone an important book or tool, and

they fail to return it.

. You have had a busy day, and the person you live

with starts to complain about how you forgot to do
something that you agreed to do.

. You are trying to discuss something important with

your mate or partner who isn’t giving you a chance
to express your feelings.

. You are in a discussion with someone who persists

in arguing about a topic they know very little about.

Someone sticks his or her nose into an argument
between you and someone else.

You need to get somewhere quickly, but the car in
front of you is going 25 mph tn a 40 mph zone, and
you can’t pass.

Stepping on a gob of chewing gum.

Being mocked by a small group of people as you
pass them.

152 David D. Burns, M.D.

24. In a hurry to get somewhere, you tear a good pair
of slacks on a sharp object.

25. You use your last dime to make a phone call, but
you are disconnected before you finish dialing and
the dime is lost.

Now that you have completed the Anger Inventory, you
are in a position to calculate your IQ, your Irritability Quo-
tient. Make sure that you have not skipped any items. Add
up your score for each of the twenty-five incidents. The
lowest possible total score on the test would be zero. This
would mean you put down a zero on each item. This in-
dicates you are either a liar or a guru! The highest score
would be a hundred. This would mean you recorded a four
on each of the twenty-five items, and you're constantly at
or beyond the boiling point.

You can now interpret your total score according to the
following scale:

0-45: The amount of anger and annoyance you gen-
erally experience is remarkably low. Only a
few percent of the population will score this
low on the test. You are one of the select few!

46-55: You are substantially more peaceful than the
average person.

56-75: You respond to life’s annoyances with an av-
erage amount of anger.

76-85: You frequently react in an angry way to life’s
many annoyances. You are substantially more
irritable than the average person.

86—100: You are a true anger champion, and you are
plagued by frequent intense furious reactions
that do not quickly disappear. You probably
harbor negative feelings long after the initial
insult has passed. You may have the repu-
tation of a firecracker or a hothead among

FEELING GOOD 153

people you know. You may experience fre-
quent tension headaches and elevated blood
pressure. Your anger may often get out of
control and lead to impulsive hostile outbursts
which at times get you into trouble. Only a
few percent of the adult population react as
intensely as you do.

Now that you know how much anger you have, let’s see
what you can do about it. Traditionally psychotherapists
(and the general public) have conceptualized two primary
ways to deal with anger: (a) anger turned ‘‘inward’’; or (b)
anger turned ‘‘outward.’’ The former solution is felt to be
the ‘‘sick’’ one—you internalize your aggression and absorb
resentment like a sponge. Ultimately it corrodes you and
leads to guilt and depression. Early psychoanalysts such as
Freud felt that internalized anger was the cause of depres-
sion. Unfortunately, there is no convincing evidence in sup-
port of this notion.

The second solution is said to be the ‘‘healthy’’ one—
you express your anger, and as you ventilate your feelings,
you presumably feel better. The problem with this simplistic
approach is that it doesn’t work very well. If you go around
ventilating all your anger, people will soon regard you as
loony. And at the same time you aren’t learning how to
deal with people in society without getting angry.

The cognitive solution transcends both of these. You have
a third option: Stop creating your anger. You don’t have to
choose between holding it in or letting it out because it
won't exist.

In this chapter I provide guidelines to help you assess the
pros and cons of experiencing anger in a variety of situations
so you can decide when anger is and isn’t in your best self-
interest. If you choose, you can develop control over your
feelings; you will gradually cease to be plagued by excessive
irritability and frustration that sour your life for no good
reason.

154 David D. Burns, M.D.

Just Who Is Making You Angry?

‘*People!

Shit!

I’m fed up with them!

I need a vacation from people.”’

The woman who recorded this thought at 2:00 a.m.
couldn’t sleep. How could the dogs and noisy neighbors in
her apartment building be so thoughtless? Like her, I'll bet
you're convinced it’s other people’s stupid, self-centered
actions that make you angry.

It’s natural to believe that external events upset you.
When you’re mad at someone, you automatically make them
the cause of all your bad feelings. You say, ‘“‘You’re an-
noying me! You’re getting on my nerves.’’ When you think
like this, you’re actually fooling yourself because other peo-
ple really cannot make you angry. Yes—you heard me right.
A pushy teenager might crowd in front of you in line at the
movie theater. A con artist might sell you a fake ancient
coin at an antique shop. A ‘‘friend’’ might screw you out
of your share of a profitable business deal. Your boyfriend
might always show up late for dates in spite of his knowing
how important promptness is to you. No matter how out-
rageous Or unfair others might appear to you, they do not,
never did, and never will upset you. The bitter truth is that
you’re the one who’s creating every last ounce of the outrage
you experience.

Does that sound like heresy or stupidity to you? If you
think I’m contradicting the obvious, you may feel like burn-
ing this book or throwing it down in disgust. If so, I dare
you to read on, because—

Anger, like all emotions, is created by your cognitions.
The relationship between your thoughts and your anger 1s
shown in Figure 7-1. As you will note, before you can feel
irritated by any event you must first become aware of what
is Occurring and come to your own interpretation of it. Your
feelings result from the meaning you give to the event, not
from the event itself.

FEELING GOOD 155

Figure 7-1. it is not negative events but your perceptions and
thoughts about these events that create your emotional response.

EXTERNAL EVENTS: (not INTERNAL EVENTS:
within your control) (within your control)

The actions of other people.

Thoughts

‘It’s unfair!”
“That damn
jerk!”

“Lt won't stand
for it!”

Behaviors Emotions

You tell the other guy Anger, frustration,
off or withdraw icily. fear, guilt.

You scheme to retal-
iate so as to even the
score.

For example, suppose that after a hectic day you put your
two-year-old child to sleep in his crib for the night. You
close his bedroom door and sit down to relax and watch
television. Twenty minutes later he suddenly opens the door
to his room and walks out giggling. You might react to this
in a variety of ways, depending on the meaning you attach
to it. If you feel irritated, you’re probably thinking, ‘‘Damn
it! He’s always a bother. Why can’t he stay in bed and
behave like he should? He never gives me a minute’s rest!”’
On the other hand, you could be delighted to see him pop
out of his room because you’re thinking, “‘Great! He just
crawled out of his crib on his own for the first time. He’s

156 David D. Burns, M.D.

growing up and getting more independent.’’ The event is
the same in both cases. Your emotional reaction is deter-
mined entirely by the way you are thinking about the sit-
uation.

Ill bet I know what you’re thinking now: **That example
with the baby is not applicable. When / get angry there’s
a justifiable provocation. There’s plenty of genuine unfair-
ness and cruelty in this world. There’s no valid way I can
think about all the crap I have to put up with each day
without getting uptight. Do you want to perform a lobotomy
and turn me into an unfeeling zombie? NO THANKS!”’

You are certainly right that plenty of genuinely negative
events do go on every day, but your feelings about them
are still created by the interpretations you place on them.
Take a careful look at these interpretations because anger
can be a two-edged sword. The consequences of an im-
pulsive outburst will frequently defeat you in the long run.
Even if you are being genuinely wronged, it may not be to
your advantage to feel angry about it. The pain and suffering
you inflict on yourself by feeling outraged may far exceed
the impact of the original insult. As a woman who runs a
restaurant put it, ‘‘Sure—I have the right to fly off the
handle. The other day I realized the chefs forgot to order
ham again even though I had specifically reminded them,
so I exploded and threw a cauldron of hot soup across the
kitchen floor in disgust. Two minutes later I knew I’d acted
like the biggest asshole in the world, but I didn’t want to
admit it, so I had to spend all my energy for the next forty-
eight hours trying to convince myself [ had the nght to make
a jackass of myself in front of twenty employees! It wasn’t
worth it!’’

In many cases your anger 1s created by subtle cognitive
distortions. As with depression, many of your perceptions
are twisted, one-sided, or just plain wrong. As you learn to
replace these distorted thoughts with others that are more
realistic and functional, you will feel less irritable and gain
greater self-control.

What kinds of distortion occur most often when you are

FEELING GOOD 157

angry? One of the greatest offenders is labeling. When you
describe the person you’re mad at as ‘‘a jerk’’ or ‘‘a bum’”’
or *‘a piece of shit,’’ you see him in a totally negative way.
You could call this extreme form of overgeneralization
‘‘globalizing’’ or ‘‘monsterizing.’’ Someone may in fact
have betrayed your trust, and it is absolutely right to resent
what that person did. In contrast, when you label someone,
you create the impression that he or she has a bad essence.
You are directing your anger toward what that person ‘‘is.”’

When you write people off this way, you catalog in your
mind’s eye every single thing about them you don’t like
(the mental filter) and ignore or discount their good points
(disqualifying the positive). This is how you set up a false
target for your anger. In reality, every human being is a
complex mix of positive, negative, and neutral attributes.

Labeling is a distorted thinking process that causes you
to feel inappropriately indignant and morally superior. It’s
destructive to build your self-image this way: Your labeling
will inevitably give way to your need to blame the other
person. Your thirst for retaliation intensifies the conflict and
brings out similar attitudes and feelings in the person you’re
mad at. Labeling inevitably functions as a self-fulfilling
prophecy. You polarize the other person and bring about a
State of interpersonal warfare.

What’s the battle really all about? Often you’re involved
in a defense of your self-esteem. The other person may have
threatened you by insulting or criticizing you, or by not
loving or liking you, or by not agreeing with your ideas.
Consequently, you may perceive yourself in a duel of honor
to the death. The problem with this is that the other person
is not a totally worthless shit, no matter how much you
insist! And, furthermore, you cannot enhance your own
esteem by denigrating someone else even if it does feel good
temporarily. Ultimately only your own negative, distorted
thoughts can take away your self-respect, as pointed out in
Chapter 4. There is one and only one person in this world
who has the power to threaten your self-esteem—and that
is you. Your sense of worth can go down only if you put

158 David D. Burns, M.D.

yourself down. The real solution is to put an end to your
absurd inner harangue.

Another distortion characteristic of anger-generating
thoughts is mind reading—you invent motives that explains
to your satisfaction why the other person did what he or
she did. These hypotheses are frequently erroneous because
they will not describe the actual thoughts and perceptions
that motivated the other person. Due to your indignation,
it may not occur to you to check out what you are saying
to yourself.

Common explanations you might offer for the other per-
son’s objectionable behavior would be ‘‘He has a mean
streak’’; ‘‘She’s unfair’’; ‘‘He’s just like that’’; ‘‘She’s stu-
pid’’; ‘“They’re bad kids’’; and so forth. The problem with
these so-called explanations is that they are just additional
labels that don’t really provide any valid information. In
fact, they are downright misleading.

Here’s an example: Joan got hot under the collar when
her husband told her he’d prefer to watch the Sunday football
game on TV rather than go with her to a concert. She felt
miffed because she told herself, ‘‘He doesn’t love me! He
always has to get his own way! It’s unfair!”’

The problem with Joan’s interpretation is that it is not
valid. He does love her, he doesn’t always get his way, and
he isn’t intentionally being ‘‘unfair.’’ On this particular
Sunday the Dallas Cowboys are locking spurs with the Pitts-
burgh Steelers, and he really wants to see that game! There’s
no way he’s going to want to get dressed and go to a concert.

When Joan thinks about her husband’s motivations tn
such an illogical fashion, she creates two problems for the
price of one. She has to put up with the self-created illusion
that she’s unloved in addition to missing out on his company
at the concert.

The third form of distortion that leads to anger is mag-
nification. If you exaggerate the importance of the negative
event, the intensity and duration of your emotional reaction
may get blown up out of all proportion. For example, if
you are waiting for a late bus and you have an important

FEELING GOOD 159

appointment, you might tell yourself, ‘‘I can’t take this!’’
Isn’t that a slight exaggeration? Since you are taking it, you
can take it, so why tell yourself you can’t? The inconven-
lence of waiting for the bus is bad enough without creating
additional discomfort and self-pity in this way. Do you really
want to fume like that?

Inappropriate should and shouldn’t statements represent
the fourth type of distortion that feeds your anger. When
you find that some people’s actions are not to your liking,
you tell yourself they ‘“‘shouldn’t’’ have done what they did,
or they “‘should have’’ done something they failed to do.
For example, suppose you register at a hotel and discover
they lost the record of your reservation, and now there are
no rooms available. You furiously insist, ‘“This shouldn’t
have happened! Those stupid goddam clerks!’’

Does the actual deprivation cause your anger? No. The
deprivation can only create a sense of loss, disappointment,
Or inconvenience. Before you can feel anger, you must
necessarily make the interpretation you are entitled to get
what you want in this situation. Consequently, you see the
goof-up on your reservation as an injustice. This perception
leads to your feeling angry.

So what’s wrong with that? When you say the clerks
shouldn’t have made a mistake, you are creating unneces-
sary frustration for yourself. It’s unfortunate your reserva-
tion was lost, but it’s highly unlikely anyone intended to
treat you unjustly, or that the clerks are especially stupid.
But they did make an error. When you insist on perfection
from others, you will simply make yourself miserable and
become immobilized. Here’s the rub: Your anger probably
won’t cause a room to appear magically, and the incon-
venience of going to another hotel will be far less than the
misery you inflict on yourself by brooding for hours or days
about the lost reservation.

Irrational should statements rest on your assumption that
you are entitled to instant gratification at all times. So on
those occasions when you don’t get what you want, you go
into panic or rage because of your attitude that unless you

160 David D. Burns, M.D.

get X, you will either die or be tragically deprived of joy
forever (X can represent love, affection, status, respect,
promptness, perfection, niceness, etc.). This insistence that
your wants be gratified at all times is the basis for much
self-defeating anger. People who are anger-prone often for-
mulate their desires in moralistic terms such as this: If ?'m
nice to someone, they should be appreciative.

Other people have free will, and often think and act in
ways that aren’t to your liking. All of your insistence that
they must fall in line with your desires and wishes will not
produce this result. The opposite is more often true. Your
attempts to coerce and manipulate people with angry de-
mands most often will alienate and polarize them and make
them much less likely to want to please you. This is because
other people don’t like being controlled or dominated any
more than you do. Your anger will simply limit the creative
possibilities for problem solving.

The perception of unfairness or injustice is the ultimate
cause of most, if not all, anger. In fact, we could define
anger as the emotion which corresponds in a one-to-one
manner to your belief that you are being treated unfairly.

Now we come to a truth you may see either as a bitter
pill or an enlightening revelation. There is no such thing as
a universally accepted concept of fairness and justice. There
is an undeniable relativity of fairness, just as Einstein
showed the relativity of time and space. Einstein postu-
lated—and it has since been experimentally validated—there
is no ‘‘absolute time’’ that is standard throughout the uni-
verse. Time can appear to “speed up’’ and “‘slow down,”’
and is relative to the frame of reference of the observer.
Similarly, ‘‘absolute fairness’’ does not exist. ‘‘Fairness’’
is relative to the observer, and what is fair to one person
Can appear quite unfair to another. Even social rules and
moral strictures which are accepted within one culture can
vary substantially in another. You can protest that this is
not the case and insist that your own personal moral system
is universal, but it just ain’t so!

Here’s proof: When a lion devours a sheep, is this unfair?

FEELING GOOD 16!

From the point of view of the sheep, it is unfair; he’s being
viciously and intentionally murdered with no provocation.
From the point of view of the lion, it is fair. He’s hungry,
and this is the daily bread he feels entitled to. Who is
‘‘right?’? There is no ultimate or universal answer to this
question because there’s no ‘‘absolute fairness’’ floating
around to resolve the issue. In fact, fairness is simply a
perceptual interpretation, an abstraction, a self-created con-
cept. How about when you eat a hamburger? Is this ‘‘un-
fair’’? To you, it’s not. From the point of view of the cow,
it certainly is (or was)! Who’s “‘right’’? There is no ultimate
‘‘true’’ answer.

In spite of the fact that ‘‘absolute fairness’’ does not exist,
personal and social moral codes are important and useful.
I am not recommending anarchy. I am saying that moral
statements and judgments about fairness are stipulations,
not objective facts. Social moral systems, such as the Ten
Commandments, are essentially sets of rules that groups
decide to abide by. One basis for such systems is the en-
lightened self-interest of each member of the group. If you
fail to act in a manner that takes into account the feelings
and interests of others you are likely to end up less happy
because sooner or later they will retaliate when they notice
you are taking advantage of them.

A system which defines **fairness’’ varies in its generality
depending on how many people accept it. When a rule of
behavior is unique to one person, other people may see it
as eccentric. An example of this would be my patient who
washes her hands ritualistically over fifty times a day to
‘‘set things right’’ and to avoid extreme feelings of guilt
and anxiety. When a rule is nearly universally accepted it
becomes part of a general moral code and may become a
part of the body of law. The prohibition against murder ts
an example. Nevertheless, no amount of general acceptance
can make such systems ‘‘absolute’’ or ‘‘ultimately valid’’
for everyone under all circumstances.

Much everyday anger results when we confuse our own
personal wants with general moral codes. When you get

162 David D. Burns, M.D.

mad at someone and you claim that they are acting ‘‘un-
fairly,’’ more often than not what is really going on is that
they are acting ‘‘fairly’’ relative to a set of standards and
a frame of reference that differs from yours. Your assump-
tion that they are *‘being unfair’’ implies that your way of
looking at things is universally accepted. For this to be the
case, everyone would have to be the same. But we aren’t.
We all think differently. When you overlook this and blame
the other person for being ‘‘unfair’’ you are unnecessarily
polarizing the interaction because the other person will feel
insulted and defensive. Then the two of you will argue
fruitlessly about who is “*right.’’ The whole dispute is based
on the illusion of “‘‘absolute fairness.”’

Because of your relativity of fairness, there is a logical
fallacy that is inherent in your anger. Although you feel
convinced the other guy 1s acting unfairly, you must realize
he is only acting unfairly relative to your value system. But
he 1s operating from his value system, not yours. More often
than not, his objectionable action will seem quite fair and
reasonable to him. Therefore, from his point of view—
which is his only possible basis for action—what he does
is ‘‘fair.’’ Do you want people to act fairly? Then you should
want him to act as he does even though you dislike what
he does, since he is acting fairly within his system! You
can work to try to convince him to change his attitudes and
ultimately modify his standards and his actions, and in the
meantime you can take steps to make certain you won’t
suffer as a result of what he does. But when you tell yourself,
‘*He’s acting unfairly,’’ you are fooling yourself and you
are chasing a mirage!

Does this mean that all anger is inappropriate and that
the concepts of “‘fairness’’ and **morality’’ are useless be-
cause they are relative? Some popular writers do give this
impression. Dr. Wayne Dyer writes:

We are conditioned to look for justice in life and when
it doesn’t appear, we tend to feel anger, anxiety or

FEELING GOOD 163

frustration. Actually, it would be equally productive
to search for the fountain of youth, or some such myth.
Justice does not exist. It never has, and it never will.
The world is simply not put together that way. Robins
eat worms. That’s not fair to the worms... . You have
only to look at nature to realize there is no justice in
the world. Tornadoes, floods, tidal waves, droughts
are all unfair.*

This position represents the opposite extreme, and is an
example of all-or-nothing thinking. It’s like saying—throw
your watches and clocks away because Etnstein showed that
absolute time does not exist. The concepts of time and
fairness are socially useful even though they do not exist in
an absolute sense.

In addition to this contention that the concept of fairness
is an illusion, Dr. Dyer seems to suggest that anger is use-
less:

You may accept anger as a part of your life, but do
you realize it serves no utilitarian purpose? . . . You do
not have to possess it, and tt serves no purpose that
has anything to do with being a happy, fulfilled person.
... The irony of anger is that it never works in changing
others... . **

Again, his arguments seem to be based on cognitive dis-
tortion. To say anger serves no purpose is just more all-or-
nothing thinking, and to say it never works is an over-
generalization. Actually, anger can be adaptive and
productive in certain situations. So the real question is not
‘*Should I or should I not feel anger?’’ but rather ‘‘Where
will I draw the line?’’

*Dr. Wayne W. Dyer, Your Erroneous Zones (New York: Avon Books,
1977), p. 173

**Ilbid , pp 218-220

164 David D. Burns, M.D.

The following two guidelines will help you to determine
when your anger is productive and when it is not. These
two criteria can help you synthesize what you are learning
and to evolve a meaningful personal philosophy about anger:

|. Is my anger directed toward someone who has know-
ingly, intentionally, and unnecessarily acted in a hurt-
ful manner?

2. Is my anger useful? Does it help me achieve a desired
goal or does it simply defeat me?

Example: You are playing basketball, and a fellow on the
other team elbows you in the stomach intentionally so as to
upset you and get you off your game. You may be able to
channel your anger productively so you will play harder and
win. So far your anger is adaptive.* Once the game is over,
you may no longer want that anger. Now it’s maladaptive.

Suppose your three-year-old son runs mindlessly into the
street and risks his life. In this case he is not intentionally
inflicting harm. Nevertheless, the angry mode in which you
express yourself may be adaptive. The emotional arousal in
your voice conveys a message of alarm and importance that
might not come across if you were to deal with him in a
calm, totally objective manner. In both these examples, you
chose to be angry, and the magnitude and expression of the
emotion were under your control. The adaptive and positive
effects of your anger differentiate it from hostility, which
is impulsive and uncontrolled and leads to aggression.

Suppose you are enraged about some senseless violence
you read about in the paper. Here the act seems clearly
hurtful and immoral. Nevertheless, your anger may not be
adaptive if—as is usually the case—there is nothing you
pian to do about it. If, in contrast, you choose to help the

*Adaptive means useful and self-enhancing; maladaptive means useless
and self-destructive.

FEELING GOOD 165

victims or begin a campaign to fight crime in some way,
your anger might again be adaptive.

Keeping these two criteria in mind, let me give you a
series of methods you can use to reduce your anger in those
situations where it is not in your best interest.

Develop the Desire. Anger can be the most difficult
emotion to modify, because when you get mad you will be
like a furious bulldog, and persuading you to stop sinking
your teeth into the other person’s leg can be extremely
tough. You won't really want to rid yourself of those feel-
ings because you will be consumed by the desire for re-
venge. After all, because anger is caused by what you
perceive to be unfair, it is a moral emotion, and you will
be extremely hesitant to let go of the righteous feeling. You
will have the nearly irresistible urge to defend and justify
your anger with religious zeal. Overcoming this will require
an act of great willpower. So why bother?

The first step: Use the double-column technique to make
a list of the advantages and disadvantages of feeling angry
and acting in a retaliatory manner. Consider both the short-
and long-term consequences of your anger. Then review the
list and ask yourself which are greater, the costs or the
benefits? This will help you determine if your resentment
is really in your best self-interest. Since most of us ulti-
mately want what’s best for us, this can pave the way for
a more peaceful and productive attitude.

Here’s how it works. Sue is a thirty-one-year-old woman
with two daughters from a previous marriage. Her husband,
John, is a hard-working lawyer with one teenage daughter
from his prior marriage. Because John’s time ts very limited,
Sue often feels deprived and resentful. She told me she felt
he wasn’t giving her a fair shake in the marriage because
he was not giving her enough of his time and attention. She
listed the advantages and disadvantages of her irritability in
Figure 7-2.

She also made a list of the positive consequences that

166 David D. Burns, M.D.

Figure 7-2. The Anger Cost-Benefit Analysis.

Advantages of My Anger

1. it feels good l

2. John will understand that [| 2.
strongly disapprove of him.

3. [have the right to blow my stack 3
| if 1 want to.

4. He’ll know [I'm not a doormat. 4

5. Pll show him [ won’t stand for 5
being taken advantage of

6. Even though | don't get what I 6
want, I can at least have the sat-
isfaction of getting revenge |!
can make him squirm and feel
hurt like I do. Then he'll have
to shape up.

Disadvantages of My Anger

I will be souring my relationship with
John even more

He will want to reject me.

I will often feel guilty and down on my-
self after | blow my stack

He will probably retaliate against me and
get angry right back, stnce he doesn’t
like being taken advantage of either

My anger inhibits both of us from cor-
recting the problem that caused the anger
in the first place. It prevents resolution
and sidetracks us from dealing with the
issues.

One minute I’m up, one minute I’m
down My armitability makes John and the
people around me never know what to
expect. I get labeled as moody and
cranky and spotled and immature. They
see me as a Childish brat

. 1 might make neurotics out of my kids

As they grow up, they may resent my
explosions and see me as someone to
stay away from rather than to go to for
help.

John may leave me if he gets enough of
my nagging and bitching.

The unpleasant feelings | create make me
tee] miserable. Life becomes a sour and
bitter experience, and | miss out on the
joy and creativity | used to prize so
highly.

might result from eliminating her anger: (1) People will like
me better. They will want to be near me; (2) I will be more
predictable; (3) | will be in better control of my emotions,
(4) I will be more relaxed; (5) I will be more comfortable
with myself; (6) I will be viewed as a positive, nonjudg-
mental, practical person; (7) I will behave more often as an
adult than as a child who has to get what it wants; (8) I will

FEELING GOOD 167

influence people more effectively, and I'll get more of what
I want through assertive, calm, rational negotiation than
through tantrums and demands; and (9) my kids, husband,
and parents will respect me more. As a result of this as-
sessment, Sue told me she was convinced that the price of
her anger substantially exceeded the benefits.

It is crucial that you perform this same type of analysis
as a first step in coping with your anger. After you list the
advantages and disadvantages of your anger, give yourself
the same test. Ask yourself, if the upsetting situation that
provokes me doesn’t change immediately, would I be will-
ing to cope with it instead of getting angry? If you can
answer yes, then you are clearly motivated to change. You
will probably succeed in gaining greater inner peace and
self-esteem, and you will increase your effectiveness in life.
This choice ts up to you.

Cool Those Hot Thoughts. Once you’ ve decided to cool
down, an invaluable method that can help you is to write
down the various ‘‘hot thoughts’’ that are going through
your mind when you are upset. Then substitute less upset-
ting, more objective “‘cool thoughts,’’ using the double-
column method (Figure 7-3). Listen for those ‘‘hot
thoughts’’ with your ‘‘third ear’’ so as to tune in to the
antagonistic statements that go through your head. Record
this private dialogue without any censorship. I’m sure you'll
notice all kinds of highly colorful language and vengeful
fantasies—write them all down. Then substitute ‘‘cool
thoughts’’ that are more objective and less inflammatory.
This will help you feel less aroused and overwhelmed.

Sue used this technique to deal with the frustration she
felt when John’s daughter, Sandy, acted manipulative and
wrapped John around her finger. Sue kept telling him to be
more assertive with Sandy and less of a soft touch, but he
often reacted negatively to her suggestions. He felt Sue was
nagging and making demands to get her way. This made
him want to spend even /ess time with her, which contrib-
uted to a vicious cycle.

Figure 7—3. Sue wrote down her “Hot Thoughts” when her hus-
band acted like a soft touch in response to his teenage daughter's
selfish manipulations. When she substituted less upsetting “Cool
Thoughts,” her jealousy and resentment diminished.

Hot Thoughts Cool Thoughts

1. How dare he not listen 1. Easily. He’s not obliged to do

to me!

. Sandy lies. She says
she’s working, but she’s
not. Then she expects
John’s help.

. John doesn’t have much

free time and if he
spends it helping her, I
will have to be alone
and take care of my kids
by myself.

. Sandy’s taking time
away from me.

. John’s) a_— schmuck.
Sandy uses people.

. TL can’t stand it!

. Pm a baby brat. | de-
serve to feel guilty.

everything my way. Besides
he is listening, but he’s being
defensive because I’m acting
So pushy.

. It’s her nature to lie and to be

lazy and to use people when it
comes to work in school. She
hates work. That’s her prob-
lem.

. So what. I like being alone.

I’m capable of taking care of
my kids by myself. I’m not
helpless. I can do tt. Maybe
he’ll want to be with me more
if I learn not to get angry all
the time.

. That’s true. But I’m a big girl.

I can tolerate some time alone.
I wouldn’t be so upset if he
were working with my kids.

. He’s a big boy. If he wants to

help her he can. Stay out of it.
It’s not my business.

. I can. It’s only temporary. I’ve

stood worse.

. I’m entitled to be immature at

times. I’m not perfect and |
don’t need to be. It’s not nec-
essary to feel guilty. This
won't help.

FEELING GOOD 169

Sue wrote down the ‘‘hot thoughts’’ that made her feel
jealous and guilty (see Figure 7—3). As she substituted ‘‘cool
thoughts,’’ she felt better, and this served as an antidote to
her urge to try to control John. Although she still felt he
was wrong in letting Sandy manipulate him, she decided he
had the ‘‘right’’ to be ‘‘wrong.’’ Consequently, Sue pushed
John less, and he began to feel less pressured. Their rela-
tionship improved and ripened in a climate of mutual free-
dom and respect. Simply talking back to her “‘hot thoughts’’
was, of course, not the only ingredient that led to a suc-
cessful second marriage for Sue and John, but it was a
necessary and gigantic first step without which both of them
could have easily ended up stalemated again!

You can also use the more elaborate chart, the ‘‘Daily
Record of Dysfunctional Thoughts,’’ to deal with your anger
(see Figure 7—4, page 170). You can describe the provoc-
ative situation and assess how angry you feel before and
after you do the exercise. Figure 7—4 shows how a young
woman coped with her frustration when she was dealt with
tersely by a prospective employer over the telephone. She
reported that pinpointing her ‘‘hot thoughts’’ and putting
the lie to them helped her nip an emotional explosion in the
bud. This prevented the fretting and fuming that normally
would have soured her entire day. She told me, ‘‘Before I
did the exercise I thought my enemy was the man on the
other end of the phone. But | learned that / was treating
myself ten times worse than he was. Once I recognized this,
it was relatively easy to substitute cooler thoughts, and |
surprised myself by feeling a whole Jot better right away!’’

Imagining Techniques. Those negative ‘‘hot thoughts”’
that go through your mind when you are angry represent
the script of a private movie (usually X-rated) that you
project Onto your mind. Have you ever noticed the picture
on the screen? The images, daydreams, and fantasies of
revenge and violence can be quite colorful indeed!

You may not be aware of these mental pictures unless

a ee)

%®S1
vuonensny
paney
Josuy

aulo2inoc

"synod
wYym Seur—pom Au mouy
[ “Joa0 SUIAID YOM 2.UST SIU
(MD OW ayBUI auOsUOS prnoys
AUA {SNOjNIIPU Jey) J,USI MON

‘SulAQ Wy
Ise] ty 1,U0M AdYyi asiN0d jO

"jad ues | sgof
Joyjo Aueul are asayy ‘uonod
-oid JO INO s8uNY Suimolq WJ

ey? 941] uUOSWOS JO}
YJOM O} JUBM | P[NOM ‘sapisag
"sty S,3i—gof ayy 398 3 ,upip | Iyney
Aw }0U $.3!80$ poos WwW] MOUY |
‘aouauiodxa Aus urejdxa Aypear 0}
dW MO[[e 1,.UpIp ay OG “KemMXue
SDIOA SITY JO U0} JU) Syl} 2,upIp

] Gpowoxe os Sumas | we Ay “| Yury ay saop jay ays oy jot YL “|

s1ysnoy [ joo

"> ‘AID 0} BuIOS Wy -

€ "ou ({DY [fn sjuared Ap -

“YW YSO] Y pue
'Z ‘soded oy) ul pe jsoq ays sem Jey]

dousLiod
-x2 YsnOUs UBY) BOW aARyY fj S7 JY

syysnoy | 10H

%86
UOIJBISNY
paney
Josuy

suonowq

jaouauadxs Yysnous pey
1 1UIY? 1, UpEp ay asned, gof 10; umop
dU pawn} ay usyy sem it Auedwos
jO puUly JeyM dU {fo} UDAD },UPFNOM
WUeW OU} ‘ISI ..“sousUadxa swWOS,,
sposu—pies py “Isiuonduosue) je!
-powl owin-ued 40} Jaded ul pe paye

UONONNG IANDIOAOL|

‘syyBnoy yeuogounjshq jo pucoey Ayeq ‘p—Z aunBiy


FEELING GOOD_ 171

you look for them. Let me illustrate. Suppose I ask you to
visualize a red apple in a brown basket right now. You can
do this with your eyes open or closed. There! Do you see
it now? That’s what I’m referring to. Most of us have these
visual images all day long. They are a part of normal con-
sciousness, the pictorial illustrations of our thoughts. For
example, memories sometimes occur to us as mental pic-
tures. Conjure up an image now of some vivid past event—
your high-school graduation, your first kiss (do you still
remember it?), a long hike, etc. Do you’ see it now?

These images can affect you strongly, and their influence
can be positively or negatively arousing, just like erotic
dreams or nightmares. The exhilarating effect of a positive
image can be intense. For instance, on your way to an
amusement park you might have an image of that first daz-
zling descent down the roller coaster, and you may expe-
rience the excited rush in your belly. The daydream actually
creates the pleasurable anticipation. Similarly, negative im-
ages play a powerful role in your level of emotional arousal.
Visualize right now someone whom you’ ve gotten good and
mad at sometime in your life. What images come to mind?
Do you imagine punching them in the nose or tossing them
into a vat of boiling oil?

These daydreams actually keep your anger alive long after
the initial insult has occurred. Your sense of rage may eat
away at you for hours, days, months, or even years after
the irritating event has long since passed. Your fantasies
help keep the pain alive. Every time you fantasize about
the occurrence you shoot new doses of arousal into your
system. You become like a cow chewing on poison cud.

And who is creating this anger? You are because you
chose to put those images in your mind! For all you know,
the person you are mad at lives in Timbuktu, or maybe isn’t
even alive anymore, so he or she could hardly be the culprit!
You are the director and producer of the film now, and,
what’s worse, you’re the only one in the audience. Who
has to watch and experience all the arousal? YOU DO!
You're the one who’s subjected to a continual clenching, a

172 David D. Burns, M.D.

tightening of back muscles, and an outpouring of adrenal
hormones into the bloodstream. You’re the one whose blood
pressure is going up. IN A NUTSHELL: You're making
yourself hurt. Do you want to keep this up?

If not, you will want to do something to reduce the anger-
generating images that you are projecting onto your mind.
One helpful technique is to transform them in a creative
way so they become less upsetting. Humor represents one
powerful tool you can use. For example, instead of imag-
ining wringing the neck of the person you are furious with,
fantasize that he is walking around in diapers in a crowded
department store. Visualize all the details: the potbelly, the
diaper pins, the hairy legs. Now what’s happening to your
anger? Is that a broad smile spreading across your face?

A second method involves thought stoppage. As you no-
tice the images crossing your mind each day, remind your-
self that you have the right to turn the projector off. Think
about something else. Find someone and engage him or her
in conversation. Read a good book. Bake bread. Go jogging.
When you don’t reward the anger images with your arousal,
they will recur less and less often. Instead of dwelling on
them, think about an upcoming event that excites you, or
switch to an erotic fantasy. If the upsetting memory ts per-
sistent, engage in vigorous physical exercise such as push-
ups, rapid jogging, or swimming. These have the additional
benefit of rechanneling your potentially hurtful arousal in a
highly beneficial way.

Rewrite the Rules. You may frustrate and upset yourself
needlessly because you have an unrealistic rule about per-
sonal relationships that causes you to be let down all the
time. The key to Sue’s anger was her belief she was entitled
to John’s love because of her rule ‘‘If I’m a good and faithful
wife, I deserve to be loved.’”’

As a result of this innocent-sounding assumption, Sue
experienced a constant sense of danger in her marriage be-
cause anytime John wasn’t giving her an appropriate helping
of love and attention, she would experience it as a confir-

FEELING GOOD 173

mation of her inadequacy. She would then manipulate and
demand attention and respect in a constant battle to defend
herself against a loss of self-esteem. Intimacy with him
became like slipping slowly toward the edge of an icy cliff.
No wonder she was desperately grabbing onto John, and no
wonder she would explode when she sensed his indiffer-
ence—didn’t he realize her life was at stake?

In addition to the intense unpleasantness that her ‘‘love’’
rule created, it didn’t work well in the long run. For a while
Sue’s manipulations did, in fact, get her some of the atten-
tion she craved. After all, she could intimidate John with
her emotional explosions, she could punish him with her
icy withdrawal, and she could manipulate him by arousing
his guilt.

But the price Sue pays is that the love she receives isn’t—
and can’t—be given freely and spontaneously. He will feel
exhausted, trapped, and controlled. The resentment he’s
been storing up will press for release. When he stops buying
into her belief that he has to give in to her demands, his
desire for freedom will overpower him, and he will explode.
The destructive effects of what passes for love never cease
to amaze me!

If your relationships are characterized by this cyclic ten-
sion and tyranny, you may be better off rewriting the rules.
If you adopt a more realistic attitude, you can end your
frustration. It’s much easier than trying to change the world.
Sue decided to revise her “‘love’’ rule in the following way:
‘‘If | behave in a positive manner toward John, he will
respond in a loving way a good bit of the time. I can still
respect myself and function effectively when he doesn’t.’’
This formulation of her expectations was more realistic and
didn’t put her moods and self-esteem at the mercy of her
husband.

The rules that get you into interpersonal difficulty often
won't appear to be malignant. On the contrary, they often
seem highly moral and humanistic. I recently treated a
woman named Margaret who had the notion that ‘‘marriages
should be fifty-fifty. Each partner should do for the other

174 David D. Burns, M.D.

equally.’’ She applied this rule to all human relationships.
‘‘If I do nice things for people, they should reciprocate.’”’

So what’s wrong with that? It certainly sounds ‘‘reason-
able’’ and ‘‘fair.’’ It’s kind of a spin-off from the Golden
Rule. Here’s what’s wrong with it: It’s an undeniable fact
that human relationships, including marriages, are rarely
spontaneously ‘‘reciprocal’’ because people are different.
Reciprocity is a transient and inherently unstable ideal that
can only be approximated through continued effort. This
involves mutual consensus, communication, compromise,
and growth. It requires negotiation and hard work.

Margaret’s problem was that she didn’t recognize this.
She lived in a fairytale world where reciprocity existed as
an assumed reality. She went around always doing good
things for her husband and others and then waited for their
reciprocity. Unfortunately, these unilateral contracts fell
apart because other people usually weren’t aware that she
expected to be repaid.

For example, a local charity organization advertised for
a salaried assistant director to start in several months. Mar-
garet was quite interested in this position and submitted her
application. She then gave large amounts of her time doing
volunteer work for the organization and assumed that the
other employees would “‘reciprocate’’ by liking and re-
specting her, and that the director would ‘‘reciprocate’’ by
giving her the job. In reality, the other employees did not
respond to her warmly. Perhaps they sensed and resented
her attempt to control them with her “‘niceness’’ and virtue.
When the director chose another candidate for the position,
she hit the roof and felt bitter and disillusioned because her
‘‘reciprocity’” rule had been violated!

Since her rule caused her so much trouble and disap-
pointment she opted to rewrite it, and to view reciprocity
not as a given but as a goal she could work toward by
pursuing her own self-interest. At the same time she relin-
quished her demand that others read her mind and respond
as she wanted. Paradoxically, as she learned to expect less,
she got more!

FEELING GOOD 175

Figure 7—5. Revising “Should Rules.”

Self-Defeating Should
Rule Revised Version

1. If I’m nice to someone, |. It would be nice if people were
they should be apprecta- always appreciative, but this
tive. isn’t realistic. They will often

be appreciative, but sometimes
they won’t be.

2. Strangers should treat 2. Most strangers will treat me
me courteously. courteously if I don’t act like
[ have a chip on my shoulder.
Occasionally some _ sourpuss
will act obnoxious. Why let
this bother me? Life is too
short to waste time concen-
trating on negative details.
3. If I work hard for some- 3. This is ridiculous. | have no
thing, I should get it. guarantee I’ll always be suc-
cessful in everything. I’m not
perfect and I don’t have to be.

4. If someone treats me 4. All human beings have the

unfairly, | should get right to get mad whether or not
mad because I have the they’re treated unfairly. The
right to get mad and be- real issue is—is it to my ad-
cause it makes me more vantage to get mad? Do I want
human. to feel angry? What are the

costs and benefits?

5. People shouldn’t treat 5. Hogwash. Everyone doesn’t

me in ways I wouldn’t live by my rules, so why ex-

! treat them. pect they will? People will

often treat me as well as I treat
them, but not always.

If you have a ‘‘should’’ or ‘‘shouldn’t’’ rule that has been
causing you disappointment and frustration, rewrite it in
more realistic terms. A number of examples to help you do
this are shown in Figure 7-5. You will notice that the sub-

176 David D. Burns, M.D.

stitution of one word—'‘‘it would be nice if’’ in place of
‘*should’’——can be a useful first step.

Learn to Expect Craziness. As the anger in Sue’s rela-
tionship with John cooled down, they became closer and
more loving. However, John’s daughter, Sandy, responded
to his increased intimacy by even greater manipulations.
She began to lie, borrowed money without returning it; she
sneaked into Sue’s bedroom, went through drawers, and
stole Sue’s personal items; she left the kitchen messy, etc.
All these actions effectively got Sue’s goat because she told
herself, “‘Sandy shouldn’t act so sneaky. She’s crazy! It’s
unfair!’’ Sue’s sense of frustration was the product of two
necessary ingredients:

1. Sandy’s obnoxious behavior;

2. Sue’s expectation that she should act in a more mature
way.

Since the evidence suggested that Sandy wasn’t about to
change, Sue had only one alternative: She could discard her
unrealistic expectation that Sandy behave in an adult,
ladylike fashion! She decided to write the following memo
to herself entitled:

Why Sandy Should Act Obnoxiously

It is Sandy’s nature to be manipulative because she be-
lieves that she’s entitled to love and attention. She believes
that getting love and attention 1s a matter of life and death.
She thinks she needs to be the center of attention in order
to survive. Therefore, she will see any lack of love as unfair
and a great danger to her sense of self-esteem.

Because she feels she has to manipulate in order to get
attention, she should act in a manipulative way. Therefore,
I can expect and predict that she will continue to act this
way until she changes. Since it is unlikely that she will

FEELING GOOD 177

change in the near future, 1 can expect her to continue to
behave this way for a period of time. Therefore, I will have
no reason to feel frustrated or surprised because she will be
acting the way she should act.

Furthermore, I want all humans including Sandy to act
in a manner that they believe to be fair. Sandy feels she’s
entitled to more attention. Since her obnoxious behavior is
based on her sense of entitlement, I can remind myself that
what she does is fair from her point of view.

Finally, I want my moods to be under my control, not
hers. Do I want to make myself feel upset and angry at her
‘*fair, obnoxious’’ behavior? No! Therefore, I can begin to
change the way I react to her:

1. I can thank her for stealing since this is what she
‘‘should’’ do!

2. I can laugh to myself about her manipulations since
they are childish.

3. I can choose not to be angry unless it is my decision
to use the anger to accomplish a specific goal.

4. If I feel a loss of self-esteem due to Sandy’s manip-
ulations, I can ask myself, Do I want to give a child
such power over me?

What is the desired effect of such a memorandum?
Sandy’s provocative actions are probably knowingly mali-
cious. Sandy consciously targets Sue because of the re-
sentment and helpless frustration she feels. When Sue gets
upset, she paradoxically gives Sandy exactly what she
wants! She can greatly reduce her frustration as she changes
her expectations.

Enlightened Manipulation. You may fear that you will
be a pushover if you change your expectations and give up
your anger. You might sense that other people would take
advantage of you. This apprehension reflects your sense of
inadequacy as well as the fact that you probably have not

178 David D. Burns, M.D.

been trained in more enlightened methods of going after
what you want. You probably believe that if you didn’t
make demands on people you’d end up empty-handed.

So what’s the alternative? Well, as a starting point let’s
review the work of Dr. Mark K. Goldstein, a psychologist
who has done some brilliant and creative clinical research
on the behavioral conditioning of husbands by wives. In his
work with neglected and angry wives, he became aware of
the self-defeating methods they used to get what they wanted
from their husbands. He asked himself: What have we
learned in the laboratory about the most effective scientific
methods for influencing all living organisms, including bac-
teria, plants, and rats? Can we apply these principles to
wayward and sometimes brutal husbands?

The answer to these questions was straightforward—re-
ward the desired behavior instead of punishing the undesired
behavior. Punishment causes aversion and resentment and
brings about alienation and avoidance. Most of the deprived
and abandoned wives he treated were misguidedly trying to
punish their husbands into doing what they wanted. By
switching them to a reward model in which the desired
behavior got copious attention, he observed some dramatic
turnabouts.

The wives Dr. Goldstein treated were not unique. They
were ensnarled in the ordinary marital conflicts that most
of us confront. These women had a long history of giving
their spouses attention either indiscriminately or, in some
cases, primarily in response to undesirable behavior. A ma-
jor shift had to occur in order for them to elicit the kind of
response they desired from their husbands but were not
getting. By keeping meticulous scientific records of their
interactions with their husbands, the women were able to
achieve control over how they responded.

Here’s how it worked for one of Dr. Goldstein’s patients.
After years of fighting, wife X reported she lost her husband.
He abandoned her and moved in with his girl friend. His
primary interactions with wife X had centered around abuse
and indifference. It appeared on the surface as if he didn’t

FEELING GOOD — 179

care much about her. Nevertheless, he did call her occa-
sionally, indicating he might have some interest in her. She
had the choice of cultivating this attention or crushing it
further by continued inappropriate responses.

Wife X defined her goals. She would experiment to see
if she could in fact get her husband back. The first milestone
would be to determine if she could effectively increase his
rate of contact with her. She measured meticulously the
frequency and duration of his every telephone call and visit
home, recording this information on a piece of graph paper
taped to the refrigerator door. She carefully assessed the
crucial relationship between her behavior (the stimulus) and
the frequency of his contacts (the response).

She initiated no contacts with him at all on her own, but
instead responded positively and affectionately to his calls.
Her strategy was straightforward. Rather than noticing and
reacting to all the things about him that she didn’t like, she
began to reinforce systematically those that she did like.
The rewards she used were all the things that turned him
on—praise, food, sex, affection, etc.

She began by responding to his rare calls in an upbeat,
positive, complimentary manner. She flattered and encour-
aged him. She avoided any criticism, argument, demands,
or hostility, and found a way to agree with everything he
said, using the disarming technique described in Chapter 7.
Initially she terminated all these calls after five to ten min-
utes to ensure the likelihood the conversations would not
deteriorate into an argument or become boring to him. This
guaranteed that her feedback would be pleasant to him, and
that his response to it would not be suppressed or eliminated.

After she did this a few times, she noticed her husband
began to call more and more frequently because the calls
were positive, rewarding experiences for him. She noted
this increased rate of telephoning on her graph paper just
as a Scientist observes and documents the actions of an
experimental rat. As his phone calls increased, she began
to feel encouraged, and some of her irritation and resentment
melted away.

180 David D. Burns, M.D.

One day he appeared at the house and according to her
plan, she announced, ‘‘I’m so happy you dropped by be-
cause I just happen to have a fresh, fancy imported Cuban
cigar in the freezer for you. It’s the expensive type you
really like.’’ She actually had a whole box of them waiting
so she was able to repeat this each time he visited—tre-
gardless of why or when he came. She noticed the frequency
of his visits substantially increased.

In a similar manner, she continued to ‘‘shape’’ his be-
havior using rewards rather than coercion. She realized how
successful she had been when her husband decided to leave
his girl friend and asked if he could move back in with her.

Am I saying that ts the only way to relate and to influence
people? No—that would be absurd. It’s just a pleasant spice,
not the whole banquet or even the main course. But it’s a
frequently overlooked delicacy that few appetites can resist.
There’s no guarantee it will work—some situations may be
irreversible, and you can’t always get what you want.

At any rate, ¢ry the upbeat reward system. You may be
pleasantly surprised at the remarkable effectiveness of your
secret strategy. In addition to motivating the people you
care about to want to be around you, it will improve your
mood because you learn to notice and focus on the positive
things that others do rather than dwell on their negatives.

“Should’’ Reduction. Because many of the thoughts
which generate your anger involve moralistic ‘‘should’’
statements, it will help you to master some “‘should’’ re-
moval methods. One way is to make a list, using the double-
column method, of all the reasons why you believe the other
person ‘‘shouldn’t’’ have acted as he did. Then challenge
these reasons until you can see why they are unrealistic and
don’t actually make good sense.

Example: Suppose the carpenter on your new house did
a sloppy job on the kitchen cabinets. The doors are poorly
aligned and don’t close properly. You feel trate because
you see this as ‘‘unfair.’’ After all, you paid full union
wages, so you feel entitled to excellent workmanship from

FEELING GOOD 181

Figure 7-6.

Reasons He Should Have
Taken More Pride
in His Work

. Because I paid top dollar.

. Because it’s only decent to
do a good job.

. Because he should make
sure he gets it done right.
. Because / would if | were
a carpenter.

. Because he should care
more about his product.

Rebuttals

. He gets paid the same wage

whether or not he takes ex-
tra pride in his work.

. He probably felt he did an

adequate job. And _ the
paneling he did actually
looks quite decent.

. Why should he?

. But he’s not me—he’s not

trying to meet my stan-
dards.

. There’s no reason for him

to care more. Some carpen-

ters care a lot about their
work, and for others it’s
Just a job.

. All the people who worked
on your house didn’t do
sloppy work. You can’t ex-
pect to get 100 percent top-
notch people. That would
just be unrealistic.

. So why must / get the one
who does sloppy work?

a top craftsman. You fume as you tell yourself, ““The lazy
bastard should take some pride in his work. What’s the
world coming to?’’ You list the reasons and rebuttals de-
tailed in Figure 7-6.

The rationale for eliminating your ‘‘should’’ statement is
simple: It’s not true that you are entitled to get what you
want just because you want it. You'll have to negotiate.
Call the carpenter, complain, and insist the job be corrected.

182 David D. Burns, M.D.

But don’t double your trouble by making yourself exces-
sively hot and bothered. The carpenter probably wasn’t
trying to hurt you, and your anger might simply polarize
him and put him on the defensive. After all, half of all the
Carpenters (and psychiatrists, secretaries, writers, and den-
tists, etc.) throughout human history have been below av-
erage. Do you believe that? It’s true by definition because
‘‘average’’ is defined as the halfway point! It’s ludicrous to
fume and complain that this particular carpenter’s average
talent is ‘‘unfair,’’ or that he ‘‘should’’ be other than he ts.

Negotiating Strategies. At this point you may be bris-
tling because you are thinking, ‘‘Well! That’s a fine kettle
of fish! Dr. Burns seems to be telling me I can find happiness
by believing that lazy, incompetent carpenters should do
mediocre work. After all, it’s their nature, the good doctor
claims! What weak-spined hogwash! I’m not going to be
Stripped of my human dignity and let people walk all over
me and get away with second-rate crappy work I’m paying
a fortune for.’’

Cool down! Nobody’s asking you to let the carpenter pull
the wool over your eyes. If you want to exert your influence
in an effective way instead of moping angrily and creating
inner turmoil, a calm, firm, assertive approach will usually
be the most successful. Moralistic ‘‘shoulding,’’ in contrast,
will simply aggravate you and polarize him, and cause him
to feel defensive and to counterattack. Remember —fighting
is a form of intimacy. Do you really want to be so intimate
with this carpenter? Wouldn’t you prefer to get what you
want instead?

As you stop consuming your energy in anger, you can
focus your efforts on getting what you want. The following
negotiating principles can work effectively in such a situ-
ation:

1. Instead of telling him off, compliment him on what
he did right. It’s an undeniable fact of human nature
that few people can resist flattery even if it’s blatantly

FEELING GOOD 183

insincere. However, since you can find something
good about him or his work, you can make your com-
pliment honest. Then mention the problem with the
cupboard doors tactfully, and calmly explain why you
want him to come back and correct the alignment.

2. Disarm him if he argues by finding a way to agree
with him regardless of how absurd his statements are.
This will shut him up and take the wind out of his
sails. Then tmmediately—

3. Clarify your point of view again calmly and firmly.

Repeat the above three techniques over and over in vary-
ing combinations until the carpenter finally gives in or an
acceptable compromise is reached. Use ultimatums and in-
timidating threats only as a last resort, and make sure you
are ready and willing to follow through when you do. As
a general principle, use diplomacy in expressing your dis-
satisfaction with his work. Avoid labeling him in an in-
sulting way or implying he is bad, evil, malignant, etc. If
you decide to tell him about your negative feelings, do so
objectively without magnification or an excess of inflam-
matory language. For example, ‘‘I resent shoddy work when
I feel you have the ability to do a good professional job’’
is far preferable to ‘‘You mother ! Your work is
an oOutrage.”’

In the following dialogue I will identify each of these
techniques.

YOu: I was pleased with how some of the work
came out, and I’m hopeful I'll be able to
tell other people I was happy with the whole
job. The paneling was especially well done.
I’m a little concerned about the kitchen cab-
inets, however. (Compliment)

CARPENTER: What seems to be the trouble?

YOu: The doors aren’t lined up, and many of the
handles are on crooked.

184 David D. Burns, M.D.

CARPENTER:

You:

CARPENTER:

You:

Well, that’s about the best I can do on those
kinds of cabinets. They’re mass-produced,
and they just aren’t made the best.

Well, that’s true. They aren’t as well made
as a more expensive type might be. (Dis-
arming technique) Nevertheless, they aren’t
acceptable this way, and I’d appreciate it if
you'd do something to make them more
presentable. (Clarification; tact)

You'll have to talk to the manufacturer or
the builder. There’s nothing I can do about
it.

I can understand your frustration (Disarm-
ing technique), but it’s your responsibility
to complete these cabinets to our satisfac-
tion. They’re simply not acceptable. They
look shoddy, and they don’t close properly.
I know it’s an inconvenience, but my po-
sition is that the job can’t be considered
complete and the bill won’t be paid until
you ve corrected it. (Ultimatum) I can see
from your other work that you have the skill
to make them look right in spite of the extra
time it will take. That way we’ll be com-
pletely satishted with your work, and we can
give you a good recommendation. (Com-
pliment)

Try these negotiating techniques when you are at log-
gerheads with someone. | think you’ll find they work more
effectively than blowing your stack, and you'll feel better

because you'll
want.

usually end up getting more of what you

Accurate Empathy. Empathy is the ultimate anger an-
tidote. It’s the highest form of magic described in this book,

FEELING GOOD 185

and its spectacular effects are firmly entrenched in reality.
No trick mirrors are needed.

Let’s define the word. By empathy, I do not mean the
capacity to feel the same way someone else feels. This is
sympathy. Sympathy is highly touted but is, in my opinion,
somewhat overrated. By empathy, I do not mean acting in
a tender, understanding manner. This is support. Support
is also highly valued and overrated.

So what is empathy? Empathy 1s the ability to comprehend
with accuracy the precise thoughts and motivations of other
people in such a way that they would say, ‘Yes, that is
exactly where I’m coming from!’’ When you have this ex-
traordinary knowledge, you will understand and accept
without anger why others act as they do even though their
actions might not be to your liking.

Remember, it ts actually your thoughts that create your
anger and not the other person’s behavior. The amazing
thing is that the moment you grasp why the other person is
acting that way, this knowledge tends to put the lie to your
anger-producing thoughts.

You might ask, If it’s so easy to eliminate anger through
empathy, why do people get so damn mad at each other
every day? The answer ts that empathy is difficult to acquire.
As humans we are trapped in our own perceptions, and we
react automatically to the meanings we attach to what people
do. Getting inside the other person’s skull requires hard
work, and most people don’t even know how to do this.
Do you? You will learn how in the next few pages.

Let’s start with an example. A businessman recently
sought help because of his frequent episodes of angry out-
bursts and abusive behavior. When his family or employees
didn’t do what he wanted, he’d bite their heads off. He
usually succeeded in intimidating people, and he enjoyed
dominating and humiliating them. But he sensed that his
impulsive explosions ultimately caused problems for him
because of his reputation as a sadistic hothead.

He described a dinner party he attended where the waiter

186 David D. Burns, M.D.

forgot to fill his wineglass. He felt a surge of rage due to
his thought, ‘‘The waiter thinks I’m unimportant. Who the
hell does he think he is anyway? I'd like to wring the
mother "s neck.”’

{ used the empathy method to demonstrate to him how
iNogical and unrealistic his angry thoughts were. I suggested
that we do some role-playing. He was to play the waiter,
and I would act the part of a friend. He was to try to answer
my questions as truthfully as possible. The following dia-
logue evolved:

David (playing the role of the waiter’s friend): [ no-
ticed that you didn’t fill the wineglass of that
businessman there.

PATIENT (playing the role of waiter): Oh, I see that I
didn’t fill his glass.

Davib: Why didn’t you fill his glass? Do you think he
is an unimportant person?

PATIENT (after a pause): Well, no, it wasn’t that. I ac-
tually don’t know much about him.

Davip: But didn’t you decide that he was an unim-
portant person and refuse to give him any wine
because of that?

PATIENT (laughing): No, that isn’t why I didn’t give
him any wine.

David: Then why didn’t you give him wine?

PATIENT (after thinking): Well, I was daydreaming
about my date for tonight. Furthermore, I was
looking at that pretty girl across the table. |
was distracted by her low-cut dress, and J just
overlooked his wineglass.

This role-playing episode created great relief for the pa-
tient because by placing himself in the waiter’s shoes he
was able to see how unrealistic his interpretation had been.
His cognitive distortion was jumping to conclusions (mind

FEELING GOOD 187

reading). He automatically concluded the waiter was being
unfair, which made him feel he had to retaliate to maintain
his self-pride. Once he acquired some empathy, he was able
to see that his righteous indignation was caused entirely and
exclusively by his own distorted thoughts and not the wait-
er’s actions. It is often extremely difficult for angry-prone
individuals to accept this at first because they have a nearly
irresistible urge to blame others and to retaliate. How about
you? Does the idea that many of your angry thoughts are
invalid seem abhorrent and unacceptable?

The empathy technique can also be quite useful when the
other person’s actions appear more obviously and inten-
tionally hurtful. A twenty-eight-year-old woman named
Melissa sought counseling around the time she was sepa-
rating from her husband, Howard. Five years earlier Melissa
discovered that Howard was having an affair with Ann, an
attractive secretary who worked ig his building. This rev-
elation was a heavy blow to Melissa, but to make matters
even worse, Howard was hesitant to make a clean break
with Ann, and so the affair dragged on for eight additional
months. The humiliation and rage Melissa felt during this
period was a major factor that led to her ultimate decision
to leave him. Her thoughts ran along these lines: (1) He had
no right to act like that. (2) He was self-centered. (3) It was
unfair. (4) He was a bad, rotten person. (5) I must have
failed.

In the course of a therapy session, I asked Melissa to play
Howard’s role, and then I cross-examined her to see if she
could explain precisely why he had had the affair with Ann
and acted as he did. She reported that as the role-playing
evolved, she suddenly saw where Howard had been coming
from, and at that moment her anger toward him completely
vanished. After the session she wrote a description of the
dramatic disappearance of the anger she had harbored for
years:

After Howard’s affair with Ann presumably ended, he
insisted on continuing to see her and was still very

188 David D. Burns, M.D.

much bound up with her. This was painful to me. It
made me feel that Howard really didn’t respect me and
considered himself more important than I was. I felt
that if he really did love me he wouldn’t put me through
this. How could he continue to see Ann when he knew
how miserable it made me feel? I felt really angry at
Howard and down on myself. When I tried the empathy
approach and played the role of Howard, I saw the
‘‘whole.’’ I suddenly saw things differently. When |
imagined I was Howard, I could see where he was
coming from. Putting myself in his place, I saw the
problem of loving Melissa my wife, as well as Ann
my lover. It dawned on me that Howard was really
trapped in a “‘‘can’t-win’’ system created by his
thoughts and feelings. He loved me but was desperately
attracted to Ann. As much as he wanted to he couldn’t
stop seeing her. He felt very guilty and couldn’t stop
himself. He felt he would lose if he left Ann, and he
would lose if he left me. He was unwilling and unable
to come to terms with either form of loss, and it was
his indecisiveness rather than any inadequacy on my
part which caused him to be slow in making up his
mind.

The experience was a revelation for me. I really saw
what had happened for the first time. I knew Howard
had not done anything deliberately to hurt me, but had
been incapable of doing anything other than what he
did. I felt good being able to see and understand this.

I told Howard when I spoke to him next. We both felt
a lot better about this. J also got a really good feeling
from the experience with the empathy technique. It
was very exciting. More real than what | had seen
before.

The key to Melissa’s anger was her fear of losing self-
esteem. Although Howard had indeed acted in a genuinely

FEELING GOOD 189

negative manner, it was the meaning she attached to the
experience that caused her sense of grief and rage. She
assumed that as a “‘good wife’’ she was entitled to a ‘‘good
marriage.”’’ This is the logic that got her into emotional
trouble:

Premise: If | am a good and adequate wife, my husband
is bound to love me and be faithful to me.

Observation: My husband is not acting in a loving, faithful
way.

Conclusion: Therefore, either I am not a good and ade-
quate wife, or else Howard is a bad, immoral person because
he is breaking my ‘‘rule.’’

Thus, Melissa’s anger represented a feeble attempt to save
the day because within her system of assumptions, this was
actually the only alternative to suffering a loss of self-
esteem. The only problems with her solution were (a) she
wasn’t really convinced he was ‘‘no good’’; (b) she didn’t
really want to write him off since she loved him; and
(c) her chronic sour anger didn’t feel good, it didn’t look
good, and it drove him farther away.

Her premise that he would love her as long as she was
good was a fairy tale she had never thought to question.
The empathy method transformed her thinking in a highly
beneficial way by allowing her to relinquish the grandiosity
inherent in her premise. His misbehavior was caused by his
distorted cognitions, not her inadequacy. Thus, he was re-
sponsible for the jam he was in, not she!

This sudden insight struck her like a lightning bolt. The
moment she saw the world through his eyes, her anger
vanished. She became a much smaller person tn the sense
that she no longer saw herself as responsible for the actions
of her husband and the people around her. But at the same
time she experienced a sudden increase in self-esteem.

In the next session I decided to put her new insight to
the acid test. I confronted her with the negative thoughts
that had originally upset her to see if she could answer them
effectively:

190 David D. Burns, M.D.

DAVID:

MELISSA:

DAVID:

MELISSA:

DAVID:

MELISSA:

DAVID:

MELISSA:

DAVID:

MELISSA:

DAVID:

Howard could have stopped seeing her sooner.
He made a fool out of you.

No—he couldn’t stop because he was trapped.
He felt a tremendous obsession, and he was
attracted to Ann.

But then he should’ ve gone off with her and
broken up with you so he could stop torturing
you. That would’ ve been the only decent thing
to do!

He felt he couldn’t break off with me either
because he loved me and was committed to me
and to our children.

But that was unfair, to keep you dangling so
long.

He didn’t mean to be unfair. It just happened.

It just happened! What Pollyanna nonsense!
The fact is, he shouldn’t have gotten into such
a situation in the first place.

But that’s where he was at. Ann represented
excitement, and he felt bored and overwhelmed
by life at the time. Eventually one day he just
couldn’t resist her flirting any more. He took
one small step over the line in a moment of
weakness, and then the affair was off and run-
ning.

Well, you are less of a person because he
wasn’t faithful to you. This makes you inferior.

It has nothing to do with being less of a person.
I don’t have to get what I want all the time to
be worthwhile.

But he never would have sought excitement
elsewhere if you were an adequate wife.
You’re undesirable and unlovable. You're
second-rate, and that’s why your husband had
an affair.

FEELING GOOD 191

MELISSA: The fact is, he ultimately chose me over Ann,
but that doesn’t make me any better than Ann,
does it? Similarly, the fact that he chose to deal
with his problems by escaping doesn’t mean
that I’m unlovable or less desirable.

I could see that Melissa was clearly unruffled by my
vigorous attempts to get her goat, and this proved she had
transcended this painful period of her life. She traded in her
anger for joy and self-esteem. Empathy was the key that
freed her from being trapped in hostility, self-doubt, and
despair.

Putting It All Together: Cognitive Rehearsal. When you
get angry, you may feel you react too rapidly to be able to
sit down and assess the situation objectively and apply the
various techniques described in this chapter. This is one of
the characteristics of anger. Unlike depression, which tends
to be steady and chronic, anger is much more eruptive and
episodic. By the time you are aware you are upset you may
already feel out of control.

‘*Cognitive rehearsal’’ is an effective method for solving
this problem and for synthesizing and using the tools you
have learned thus far. This technique will help you learn to
overcome your anger ahead of time without actually ex-
periencing the situation. Then when the real thing happens,
you'll be prepared to handle it.

Begin by listing an ‘‘anger hierarchy’’ of the situations
that most commonly trigger you off and rank these from
+ | (the least upsetting) to + 10 (the most infuriating), as
shown tn Figure 7—7. The provocations should be ones that
you'd like to handle more effectively because your anger is
maladaptive and undesirable.

Start with the first item on the hierarchy list that is the
least upsetting to you, and fantasize as vividly as you can
that you are in that situation. Then verbalize your ‘‘hot
thoughts’’ and write them down. In the example given tn
Figure 7—7, you’re feeling annoyed because you’re telling

192 David D. Burns, M.D.

Figure 7—7. The Anger Hierarchy.
+ |—I sit in a restaurant for fifteen minutes, and the waiter
doesn’t come.

+ 2~—] call a friend who doesn’t return the call.

+ 3—A client cancels an appointment at the last minute
without explanation.

+ 4-A client fails to show up for an appointment without
informing me.
+ 5—Someone criticizes me nastily.

+6—An obnoxious group of juveniles crowd in front of me
in line at a theater.

+ 7—I read in the paper about senseless violence, such as
rape.

+ 8—A customer refuses to pay a bill for goods I’ve deliv-
ered and skips town so that I can’t collect.

+9—Local delinquents repeatedly knock down my mailbox
in the middle of the night over a several-month period.
There’s nothing I can do to catch them or stop them.

+ 10—I see a television report that someone—presumably a
group of teenagers—have broken into the zoo at night,
and stoned a number of small birds and animals to

death and mutilated others.

yourself, ‘““The goddamn mother ing waiters don't
know what the they’re doing! Why don’t the lazy bas-
tards get off their butts and move? Who the hell do they
think they are? Am I supposed to starve to death before
they’ll give me a menu and a glass of water’?’’

Next fantasize flying off the handle, telling off the
maitre d’, and storming out and slamming the restaurant
door. Now record how upset you feel between 0 and 100 per-
cent.

Then go through the same mental scenario, but substitute
more appropriate ‘‘cool thoughts’’ and fantasize that you feel
relaxed and unperturbed; imagine that you handle the situa-
tion tactfully, assertively, and effectively. For example,


FEELING GOOD 193

you might tell yourself, ‘‘The waiters don’t seem to be
noticing me. Perhaps they’re busy and overlooked the fact
that I haven’t gotten a menu yet. No point in getting hot
under the collar about this.”’

Then instruct yourself to approach the headwaiter and
explain the situation assertively, following these principles:
Point out tactfully that you’ve been waiting; if he explains
they are busy, disarm him by agreeing with him; compli-
ment him on the good business they are doing; and repeat
your request for better service tn a firm but friendly way.
Finally, imagine that he responds by sending a waiter who
apologizes and gives you top-notch VIP service. You feel
good and enjoy the meal.

Now practice going through this version of the scenario
each night until you have mastered it and can fantasize
handling the situation effectively and calmly in this manner.
This cognitive rehearsal will enable you to program yourself
to respond in a more assertive and relaxed way when the
actual situation confronts you again.

You might have one objection to this procedure: You may
feel it is unrealistic to fantasize a positive outcome in the
restaurant since there 1s no guarantee the staff will in reality
respond in a friendly way and give you what you want. The
answer to this objection is simple. There’s no guarantee
they'll respond abrasively either, but if you expect a negative
response, you'll enhance the probability of getting one be-
cause your anger will have an enormous capacity to act as
a self-fulfilling prophecy. In contrast, if you expect and
fantasize a positive outcome and apply an upbeat approach,
it will be much more likely to occur,

You can, of course, also prepare for a negative outcome
in a Similar way, using the cognitive rehearsal method.
Imagine you do approach the waiter, and he acts snotty and
superior and gives you poor service. Now record your hot
thoughts, then substitute cool thoughts and develop a new
coping strategy as you did before.

You can continue to work your way up your hierarchy

194 David D. Burns, M.D.

list in this way until you have learned to think, feel, and act
more peacefully and effectively in the majority of the pro-
vocative situations you encounter. Your approach to these
situations will have to be flexible, and different coping tech-
niques may be required for the different types of provoca-
tions listed. Empathy might be the answer in one situation,
verbal assertiveness could be the key to another, and chang-
ing your expectations might be the most useful approach to a
third.

It will be crucial not to evaluate your progress in your an-
ger-reduction program in an all-or-nothing way because
emotional growth takes some time, especially when it comes
to anger. If you ordinarily react to a particular provocation
with 99 percent anger and then find you become 70 percent
upset next time, you could view this as a successful first try.
Now keep working at it, using your cognitive rehearsal
method, and see if you can reduce it to 50 percent and then to
30 percent. Eventually you will make it vanish altogether, or
at least you will have brought it down to an acceptable, irre-
ducible minimum.

Remember that the wisdom of friends and associates can
be a potential gold mine you can utilize when you’re stuck.
They may see clearly in any area where you have a blind spot.
Ask them how they think and behave in a particular situation
that makes you feel frustrated, helpless, and enraged. What
would they tell themselves? What would they actually do?
You can learn a surprising amount rapidly if you are willing
to ask.

Ten Things You Should Know
About Your Anger

1. The events of this world don’t make you angry. Your
‘hot thoughts’’ create your anger. Even when a gen-
uinely negative event occurs, it is the meaning you
attach to it that determines your emotional response.

The idea that you are responsible for your anger ts

FEELING GOOD 195

ultimately to your advantage because it gives you the
opportunity to achieve control and make a free choice
about how you want to feel. If it weren’t for this, you
would be helpless to control your emotions; they
would be irreversibly bound up with every external
event of this world, most of which are ultimately out
of your control.

. Most of the time your anger wil] not help you. It will
immobilize you, and you will become frozen in your
hostility to no productive purpose. You will feel better
if you place your emphasis on the active search for
creative solutions. What can you do to correct the
difficulty or at least reduce the chance that you'll get
burned in the same way in the future? This attitude
will eliminate to a certain extent the helplessness and
frustration that eat you up when you feel you can’t
deal with a situation effectively.

If no solution is possible because the provocation
is totally beyond your control, you will only make
yourself miserable with your resentment, so why not
get rid of it? It’s difficult if not impossible to feel
anger and joy simultaneously. If you think your angry
feelings are especially precious and important, then
think about one of the happiest moments of your life.
Now ask yourself, How many minutes of that period
of peace or jubilation would I be willing to trade in
for feeling frustration and irritation instead?

. The thoughts that generate anger more often than not
will contain distortions. Correcting these distortions
will reduce your anger.

. Ultimately your anger is caused by your belief that
someone is acting unfairly or some event is unjust.
The intensity of the anger will increase in proportion
to the severity of the maliciousness perceived and if
the act is seen as intentional.

. If you learn to see the world through other people’s
eyes, you will often be surprised to realize their actions

196 David D. Burns, M.D.

are not unfair from their point of view. The unfairness
in these cases turns out to be an illusion that exists
only in your mind! If you are willing to let go of the
unrealistic notion that your concepts of truth, justice,
and fairness are shared by everyone, much of your
resentment and frustration will vanish.

6. Other people usually do not feel they deserve your
punishment. Therefore, your retaliation is unlikely to
help you achieve any positive goals in your interac-
tions with them. Your rage will often just cause further
deterioration and polarization, and will function as a
self-fulfilling prophecy. Even if you temporarily get
what you want, any short-term gains from such hostile
manipulation will often be more than counterbalanced
by a long-term resentment and retaliation from the
people you are coercing. No one likes to be controlled
or forced. This is why a positive reward system works
better.

7. A great deal of your anger involves your defense
against loss of self-esteem when people criticize you,
disagree with you, or fail to behave as you want them
to. Such anger is always inappropriate because only
your Own negative distorted thoughts can cause you
to lose self-esteem. When you blame the other guy
for your feelings of worthlessness, you are always
fooling yourself.

8. Frustration results from unmet expectations. Since the
event that disappointed you was a part of ‘‘reality,’’
it was “‘realistic.”’ Thus, your frustration always re-
sults from your unrealistic expectation. You have the
right to try to influence reality to bring it more in line
with your expectations, but this is not always practical,
especially when these expectations represent ideals
that don’t correspond to everyone else’s concept of
human nature. The simplest solution would be to

9.

10.

FEELING GOOD 197

change your expectations. For example, some un-
realistic expectations that lead to frustration include:

a. If I want something (love, happiness, a promo-
tion, etc.), I deserve it.

b. If I work hard at something, I should be success-
ful.

c. Other people should try to measure up to my
standards and believe in my concept of ‘‘fair-
ness.”’

d. I should be able to solve any problems quickly
and easily.

e. If I’m a good wife, my husband is bound to love
me.

f. People should think and act the way I do.

g. If I’m nice to someone, they should reciprocate.

It is just childish pouting to insist you have the right
to be angry. Of course you do! Anger is legally
permitted in the United States. The crucial issue is—
is it to your advantage to feel angry? Will you or the
world really benefit from your rage?

You rarely need your anger in order to be human. It
is not true that you will be an unfeeling robot without
it. In fact, when you rid yourself of that sour irrit-
ability, you will feel greater zest, joy, peace, and
productivity. You will experience liberation and en-
lightenment.

Chapter &

Ways of Defeating Guilt

No book on depression would be complete without a chapter
on guilt. What ts the function of guilt? Writers, spiritual
leaders, psychologists, and philosophers have grappled for-
ever with this question. What is the basis of guilt? Does it
evolve from the concept of ‘‘original sin’’? Or from Oedipal
incestuous fantasies and the other taboos that Freud pos-
tulated? Is it a realistic and helpful component of human
experience? Or is it a ‘‘useless emotion’’ that mankind
would be better off without, as suggested by some recent
pop psychology writers?

When the mathematics of calculus was developed, sci-
entists found they could readily solve complex problems of
motion and acceleration that were extremely difficult to
handle using older méthods. The cognitive theory has sim-
ilarly provided us with a kind of *“‘emotional calculus’’ that
makes certain thorny philosophical and psychological ques-
tions much easier to resolve.

Let’s see what we can learn from a cognitive approach.
Guilt is the emotion you will experience when you have the
following thoughts:

1. I have done something I shouldn’t have (or I have
failed to do something that I should have) because my

198

FEELING GOOD 199

actions fall short of my moral standards and violate
my concept of fairness.

2. This ‘‘bad behavior’’ shows that I am a bad person
(or that I have an evil streak, or a tainted character,
or a rotten core, etc.).

This concept of the ‘‘badness”’ of self is central to guilt.
In its absence, your hurtful action might lead to a healthy
feeling of remorse but not guilt. Remorse stems from the
undistorted awareness that you have willfully and unneces-
sarily acted in a hurtful manner toward yourself or another
person that violates your personal ethical standards. Re-
morse differs from guilt because there is no implication your
transgression indicates you are inherently bad, evil, or im-
moral. To put it in a nutshell, remorse or regret are aimed
at behavior, whereas guilt is targeted toward the “‘self.’’

If in addition to your guilt you feel depression, shame,
or anxiety, you are probably making one of the following
assumptions:

1. Because of my ‘‘bad behavior,’’ I am inferior or
worthless (this interpretation leads to depression).

2. If others found out what [ did, they would look down
on me (this cognition leads to shame).

3. I’m indanger of retaliation or punishment (this thought
provokes anxiety).

The simplest way to assess whether the feelings created
by such thoughts are useful or destructive is to determine
if they contain any of the ten cognitive distortions described
in Chapter 3. To the extent that these thinking errors are
present, your guilt, anxiety, depression, or shame certainly
cannot be valid or realistic. I suspect you will find that a
great many of your negative feelings are in fact based on
such thinking errors.

The first potential distortion when you are feeling guilty

200 David D. Burns, M.D.

is your assumption you have done something wrong. This
may or may not actually be the case. Is the behavior you
condemn in yourself in reality so terrible, immoral, or
wrong? Or are you magnifying things out of proportion? A
charming medical technologist recently brought me a sealed
envelope containing a piece of paper on which she had
written something about herself which was so terrible she
couldn’t bear to say it out loud. As she trembling handed
the envelope to me, she made me promise not to read tt out
loud or laugh at her. The message inside was—‘‘I pick my
nose and eat it!’’ The apprehension and horror on her face
in contrast to the triviality of what she had written struck
me as so funny I lost all professional composure and burst
into laughter. Fortunately, she too broke into a belly laugh
and expressed a sense of relief.

Am I claiming that you never behave badly? No. That
position would be extreme and unrealistic. | am simply
insisting that to the extent your perception of goofing up is
unrealistically magnified, your anguish and self-persecution
are inappropriate and unnecessary.

A second key distortion that leads to guilt 1s when you
label yourself a ‘‘bad person’’ because of what you did.
This is actually the kind of superstitious destructive thinking
that led to the medieval witch hunts! You may have engaged
in a bad, angry, hurtful action, but it is counterproductive
to label yourself a “‘bad’’ or “‘rotten’’ person because your
energy gets channeled into rumination and self-persecution
instead of creative problem-solving strategies.

Another common guilt-provoking distortion is person-
alization. You inappropriately assume responsibility for an
event you did not cause. Suppose you offer a constructive
criticism to your boyfriend, who reacts in a defensive and
hurt manner. You may blame yourself for his emotional!
upset and arbitrarily conclude that your comment was in-
appropriate. In fact, his negative thoughts upset him, not
your comment. Furthermore, these thoughts are probably
distorted. He might be thinking that your criticism means
he’s no good and conclude that you don’t respect him.

FEELING GOOD 201

Now—did you put that illogical thought into his head? Ob-
viously not. He did it, so you can’t assume responsibility
for his reaction.

Because cognitive therapy asserts that only your thoughts
create your feelings, you might come to the nihilistic belief
that you cannot hurt anybody no matter what you do, and
hence you have license to do anything. After all, why not
run out on your family, cheat on your wife, and screw your
partner financially? If they’re upset, it’s their problem be-
cause it’s their thoughts, right?

Wrong! Here we come again to the importance of the
concept of cognitive distortion. To the extent that a person’s
emotional upset 1s caused by his distorted thoughts, then
you can say he is responsible for his suffering. If you blame
yourself for that individual’s pain, it is a personalization
error. In contrast, if a person’s suffering is caused by valid,
undistorted thoughts, then the suffering is real and may in
fact have an external cause. For example, you might kick
me in the stomach, and | could have the thoughts, “‘I’ve
been kicked! It hurts! — —- —!’’ In this case the respon-
sibility for my pain rests with you, and your perception that
you have hurt me is not distorted in any way. Your remorse
and my discomfort are real and valid.

Inappropriate ‘‘should’’ statements represent the ‘‘final
common pathway’’ to your guilt. [rrational should state-
ments imply you are expected to be perfect, all-knowing,
or all-powerful. Perfectionistic shoulds include rules for
living that defeat you by creating impossible expectations
and rigidity. One example of this would be, ‘‘I should be
happy at all times.’’ The consequence of this rule is that
you will feel like a failure every time you are upset. Since
it is Obviously unrealistic for any human being to achieve
the goal of perpetual happiness, the rule is self-defeating
and irresponsible.

A should statement that is based on the premise you are
all-knowing assumes you have all the knowledge in the
universe and that you can predict the future with absolute
certainty. For example, you might think, ‘‘I] shouldn’t have

202 David D. Burns, M.D.

gone to the beach this weekend because I was coming down
with the flu. What a jerk I am! Now I’m so sick I'll be in
bed for a week.”” Berating yourself this way is unrealistic
because you didn’t know for certain that going to the beach
would make you so ill. If you had known this, you would
have acted differently. Being human, you made a decision,
and your hunch turned out to be wrong.

Should statements based on the premise you are all-
powerful assume that, like God, you are omnipotent and
have the ability to control yourself and other people so as
to achieve each and every goal. You miss your tennis serve
and wince, exclaiming, “‘I shouldn’t have missed that
serve!’’ Why shouldn’t you? Is your tennis so superb that
you can’t possibly miss a serve?

It is clear that these three categories of should statements
create an inappropriate sense of guilt because they do not
represent sensible moral standards.

In addition to distortion, several other criteria can be
helpful in distinguishing abnormal guilt from a healthy sense
of remorse or regret. These include the intensity, duration,
and consequences of your negative emotion. Let’s use these
criteria to evaluate the incapacitating guilt of a married fifty-
two-year-old grammar-school teacher named Janice. Janice
had been severely depressed for many years. Her problem
was that she continually obsessed about two episodes of
shoplifting that had occurred when she was fifteen. Although
she had led a scrupulously honest life since that time, she
could not shake the memory of those two incidents. Guilt-
provoking thoughts constantly plagued her: “‘I’m a thief.
I’m a liar. ’'m no good. [I’m a fake.’’ The agony of her
guilt was so enormous that every night she prayed that God
would let her die in her sleep. Every morning when she
woke up still alive, she was bitterly disappointed and told
herself, “‘I’m such a bad person even God doesn’t want
me.’’ In frustration she finally loaded her husband’s pistol,
aimed it at her heart, and pulled the trigger. The gun misfired
and did not go off. She had not cocked it properly. She felt

FEELING GOOD 203

the ultimate defeat: She couldn’t even kill herself! She put
the gun down and wept in despair.

Janice’s guilt is inappropriate not only because of the
obvious distortions, but also because of the intensity, du-
ration, and consequences of what she was feeling and telling
herself. What she feels cannot be described as a healthy
remorse or regret about the actual shoplifting, but an irre-
sponsible degradation of her self-esteem that blinds her to
living in the here and now, and is far out of proportion to
any actual transgression. The consequences of her guilt cre-
ated the ultimate trony—her belief that she was a bad person
caused her to attempt to murder herself, a most destructive
and pointless act.

The Guilt Cycle

Even if your guilt is unhealthy and based on distortion,
once you begin to feel guilty, you may become trapped tn
an illusion that makes the guilt appear valid. Such illusions
can be powerful and convincing. You reason:

|. I feel guilty and worthy of condemnation. This means
I’ve been bad.

2. Since I’m bad, I deserve to suffer.

Thus, your guilt convinces you of your badness and leads
to further guilt. This cognitive-emotional connection locks
your thoughts and feelings into each other. You end up
trapped in a circular system which I call the ‘‘guilt cycle.”’

Emotional reasoning fuels this cycle. You automatically
assume that because you’re feeling guilty, you must have
fallen short in some way and that you deserve to suffer.
You reason, ‘‘I feel bad, therefore I must be bad.”’ This ts
irrational because your self-loathing does not necessarily
prove that you did anything wrong. Your guilt just reflects
the fact that you believe you behaved badly. This might be

204 David D. Burns, M.D.

the case, but it often is not. For example, children are
frequently punished inappropriately when parents are feeling
tired and irritable and misinterpret their behavior. Under
these conditions, the poor child’s guilt obviously does not
prove he or she did anything wrong.

Your self-punishing behavior patterns intensify the guilt
cycle. Your guilt-provoking thoughts lead to unproductive
actions that reinforce your belief in your badness. For ex-
ample, a guilt-prone neurologist was trying to prepare for
her medical-board certification examination. She had dif-
ficulty studying for the test, and felt guilty about the fact
that she wasn’t studying. So she wasted time each night
watching television while the following thoughts raced
through her mind: ‘‘! shouldn’t be watching TV. I should
be preparing for my boards. I’m lazy. I don’t deserve to be
a doctor. I’m too self-centered. I ought to be punished.’’
These thoughts made her feel intensely guilty. She then
reasoned, ‘‘This guilt proves what a lazy no-good person |
am.’ Thus, her self-punishing thoughts and her guilty feel-
ings reinforced each other.

Like many guilt-prone people, she had the idea that if
she punished herself enough she would eventually get mov-
ing. Unfortunately, quite the opposite was true. Her guilt
simply drained her energy and reinforced her belief that she
was lazy and inadequate. The only actions that resulted from
her self-loathing were the nightly compulsive trips to the
refrigerator to ‘‘pig out’’ on ice cream or peanut butter.

The vicious cycle that she trapped herself in ts shown in
Figure 8—1. Her negative thoughts, feelings, and behaviors
all interacted in the creation of the self-defeating, cruel
illusion that she was ‘‘bad’’ and uncontrollable.

The Irresponsibility of Guilt. If you have actually done
something inappropriate or hurtful, does it follow that you
deserve to suffer? If you feel the answer to this question is
yes, then ask yourself, ‘‘How long must I suffer? One day?
A year? For the rest of my life?’’ What sentence will you

FEELING GOOD 205

Figure 8-1. A neurologist's self-critical thoughts caused her to
feel so guilty that she had difficulty preparing for her certification
examination. Her procrastination strengthened her conviction that
she was bad and deserved punishment. This further undermined
her motivation to solve the probiem.

Thoughts

| shouldn't be watching TV. I'm
lazy and no good. I'm a self-
indulgent pig.

Emotions Behaviors

Guilt Procrastination
Anxiety Binge-eating
Self-ioathing

choose to impose on yourself? Are you willing to stop
suffering and making yourself miserable when your sentence
has expired? This would at least be a responsible way to
punish yourself because it would be time-limited. But what
is the point of abusing yourself with guilt in the first place?
If you did make a mistake and act in a hurtful way, your
guilt won’t reverse your blunder in some magical manner.
It won’t speed your learning processes so as to reduce the
chance you'll make the same mistake in the future. Other
people won’t love and respect you more because you are
feeling guilty and putting yourself down in this manner.
Nor will your guilt lead to productive living. So what’s the
point?

Many people ask, ‘‘But how could I behave morally and
control my impulses if I don’t feel guilt?’ This is the

206 David D. Burns, M.D.

probation-officer approach to living. Apparently you view
yourself as so willful and uncontrollable that you must con-
stantly castigate yourself in order to keep from going wild.
Certainly, if your behavior has a needlessly hurtful impact
on others, a small amount of painful remorse will add to
your awareness more effectively than a sterile recognition
of your goof-up with no emotional arousal. But it certainly
never helped anyone to view himself as a bad person. More
often than not, the belief that you are bad contributes to the
‘‘bad’’ behavior.

Change and learning occur most readily when you
(a) recognize that an error has occurred and (b) develop a
strategy for correcting the problem. An attitude of self-love
and relaxation facilitates this, whereas guilt often interferes.

For example, occasionally patients criticize me for mak-
ing a sharp comment that rubs them the wrong way. This
criticism usually only hurts my feelings and arouses my
guilt if it contains a grain of truth. To the extent that I feel
guilty and label myself as ‘‘bad,’’ I tend to react defensively.
I have the urge to either deny or justify my error, or to
counterattack because that feeling of being a “‘bad person’’
is so odious. This makes it much more difficult for me to
admit and correct the error. If, in contrast, I do not harangue
myself or experience any loss of self-respect, it is easy to
admit my mistake. Then I can readily correct the problem
and learn from it. The less guilt | have, the more effectively
I can do this.

Thus, what ts called for when you do goof up is a process
of recognition, learning, and change. Does guilt help you
with any of these? I don’t believe it does. Rather than
facilitating your recognition of your error, guilt engages you
in a coverup operation. You want to close your ears to any
criticism. You can’t bear to be in the wrong because it feels
so terrible. This is why guilt is counterproductive.

You may protest, “‘How can I know I’ve done something
wrong if I don’t feel guilty? Wouldn’t I just indulge in a
blind rampage of uncontrolled, destructive selfishness if it
weren't for my guilt?”’

FEELING GOOD 207

Anything is possible, but I honestly doubt this would
happen. You can replace your guilt with a more enlightened
basis for moral behavior—empathy. Empathy 1s the ability
to visualize the consequences, good and bad, of your be-
havior. Empathy is the capacity to conceptualize the impact
of what you do on yourself and on the other person, and to
feel appropriate and genuine sorrow and regret without la-
beling yourself as inherently bad. Empathy gives you the
necessary mental and emotional climate to guide your be-
havior in a moral and self-enhancing manner in the absence
of the whip of guilt.

Using these criteria, you can now readily determine
whether your feelings represent a normal and healthy sense
of remorse or a self-defeating, distorted sense of guilt. Ask
yourself:

|. Did I consciously and willfully do something ‘‘bad,”’
‘‘unfair,’’ or needlessly hurtful that | shouldn’t have?
Or am I irrationally expecting myself to be perfect,
all-knowing, or all-powerful?

2. Am I labeling myself a bad or tainted person because
of this action? Do my thoughts contain other cognitive
distortions, such as magnification, overgeneralization,
etc.?

3. Am feeling a realistic regret or remorse, which results
from an empathic awareness of the negative impact
of my action? Are the intensity and duration of my
painful emotional response appropriate to what I ac-
tually did?

4. Am] learning from my error and developing a strategy
for change, or am | moping and ruminating nonpro-
ductively or even punishing myself in a destructive
manner?

Now, let’s review some methods that will allow you to
rid yourself of inappropriate guilty feelings and maximize
your self-respect.

208 David D. Burns, M.D.

1. Daily Record of Dysfunctional Thoughts. In earlier
chapters you were introduced to a Daily Record of Dys-
functional Thoughts for overcoming low self-esteem and
inadequacy. This method works handsomely for a variety
of unwanted emotions, including guilt. Record the activat-
ing event that leads to your guilt in the column labeled
‘*Situation.’” You may write, ‘‘I spoke sharply to an as-
sociate,’’ or “‘Instead of contributing ten dollars, I threw
my alumni fund-raising appeal in. the wastebasket.’’ Then
‘‘tune in’’ to that tyrannical loudspeaker in your head and
identify the accusations that create your guilt. Finally, iden-
tify the distortions and write down more objective thoughts.
This leads to relief.

An example of this is demonstrated in Figure 8—2. Shirley
was a high-strung young woman who decided to move to
New York to pursue her acting career. After she and her
mother had spent a long and tiring day looking for apart-
ments, they took a train back to Philadelphia. After board-
ing, they discovered they had mistakenly taken a train
without food service or a lounge car. Shirley’s mother began
to complain about the lack of cocktail service, and Shirley
felt flooded with guilt and self-criticism. As she recorded
and talked back to her guilt-provoking thoughts, she felt
substantial relief. She told me that by overcoming her guilt,
she avoided the temper tantrum she would normally have
thrown in such a frustrating situation (see Figure 8—2, page
209).

2. Should Removal Techniques. Here are some methods
for reducing all those irrational ‘‘should’’ statements you’ ve
been hitting yourself with. The first is to ask yourself, “*“Who
says I should? Where is it written that I should?’’ The point
of this is to make you aware that you are being critical
of yourself unnecessarily. Since you are ultimately making
your own rules, once you decide that a rule is not useful
you can revise it or get rid of it. Suppose you are telling
yourself that you should be able to make your spouse happy
all the ttme. If your experience teaches you that this is

a a

“asnoy @ ayeul
JOU S2OP JUaPIsut 2uO

‘POOISJOPUNSIW ays
yney AW jou syy Bury)
-Alaaa dn jnoj 1,uo0p |

"ypu aids
1300 AID |, UOp—auop
SI SUOP Seu “WOW,
uey? yasdn sioui wie |

“Suryquiy)

‘p  dulyjou-10-]]e ‘Zuljaqe]

"uoTeZIPEUOSIOd

¢ *UONLZI[PIDUIBIIAC

Z Buluosvas [PUONOW A

Y

Ké

“9SNOo] eB WL]

pure ‘du 0) Pood OS S.3uS ‘p

i duryiAsaaa

dn jnoy sAemye | Op AYM ¢

“Ysyyes

OS Wi J—djQU9) [99j | MON ‘7

“SHOJWIOS WOYWM

"Syoeus USUI 10U PIp ule eB oye}

“SOUNJIWOS SOB) . poo} ou,, yey) pouteydxa oaey am ‘a]Npoyos

-SILU Yeu [Je aM ssan3 | Pinoys | ‘Ajsadosd ajnpayos ayt Ayid-jy9s ures} dy) Jo

‘SuiupAsaaa poutejdxa uipjdxa 1 upip AjjDa4 | asnvo2aq ‘Josue BuIpueIsJapuN JO

] 1ysnoy) | ‘sunoY 7% | "JUOUIa}EIS pfnoys YULIp & 198 UdAd J, UBD SYS MOU ‘uoneNsnyy yoey Jey 0} anp

Joljor §=A[UO SI spu uted) ay) Ing Jay yewaui pue ‘Aepo? aw YM YWOX MIN ‘ying pue pany AIA

fenuBsqns —AUOP] JO} peq [995 | “| ‘WONBZeUOSJag =| JOAO Je payjem WOW, ‘39H *| IWUAIXY SI Joyjouw AW
auorNMQ Sasuodsay jouoyupy suonsoisig aamius0y siy8noyy Buryoaosd-yinH suojowy UONONNS

"e-8 asnbi4


210 David D. Burns, M.D.

neither realistic nor helpful, you can rewrite the rule to make
it more valid. You might say, “‘I can make my spouse happy
some of the time, but I certainly can’t at all times. Ulti-
mately, happiness is up to him or her. And I’m not perfect
any more than he or she is. Therefore, I will not anticipate
that what I do will always be appreciated.’

In deciding about the usefulness of a particular rule, it
can be helpful to ask yourself, ‘‘What are the advantages
and disadvantages of having that rule for myself?’’ ‘“How
will it help me believe I should always be able to make my
spouse happy, and what will the price be for believing this?’’
You can assess the costs and benefits, using the double-
column method shown in Figure 8-3.

Another simple but effective way to rid yourself of should
statements involves substituting other words for ““should,’’
using the double-column technique. The terms “‘It would
be nice if’’ or “‘I wish I could’’ work well, and often sound
more realistic and less upsetting. For example, instead of

Figure 8—3. The advantages and disadvantages of believing
“| should be able to make my wife happy all the time.”

Advantages Disadvantages

1. When she is happy, | will |. When she’s unhappy, Ill feel
feel I'm doing what I’m guilty and I'll blame myself.
supposed to.

2. I'l work very hard to be a 2. She’ll be able to manipulate me
good husband. with my guilt. Anytime she wants

her way she can act unhappy, and
then [ll feel so bad Ill have to back
down.

3. Since she is unhappy a good bit of |
the time, Ill often feel like a fail-
ure. Since her unhappiness often
has nothing to do with me, this will
be a waste of energy.

4. I’llend up feeling resentful that I’m
paradoxically giving her so much
power over my moods!

FEELING GOOD 211

saying, “‘I should be able to make my wife happy,’’ you
could substitute ‘‘It would be nice if I could make my wife
happy now because she seems upset. I can ask what she’s
upset about and see if there might be a way I could help.”’
Or instead of ‘‘I shouldn’t have eaten the ice cream,’’ you
can say, ‘‘It would have been better if I hadn’t eaten the
ice cream, but it’s not the end of the world that I did.’’

Another anti-should method involves showing yourself
that a should statement doesn’t fit reality. For example,
when you say, “*I shouldn’t have done X,’’ you assume (1)
it is a fact that you shouldn’t have, and (2) it is going to
help you to say this. The ‘“‘reality method’’ reveals—to
your surprise—that the truth is usually just the opposite:
(a) In point of fact, you should have done what you did;
and (b) it is going to hurt you to say you shouldn’t have.

Incredulous? Let me demonstrate. Assume you’ve been
trying to diet and you ate some ice cream. So you have the
thought, ‘‘I shouldn’t have eaten this ice cream.’’ In our
dialogue I want you to argue that it’s really true that you
shouldn’t have eaten the ice cream, and I will try to put the
lie to your arguments. The following is modeled after an
actual conversation, which I hope you find as delightful and
helpful as I did:

DAvib: I understand you’re on a diet, and you ate some
ice cream. I believe you should have eaten the
ice cream.

YOU: Oh, no. That’s impossible. I shouldn’t have
eaten it because I’m on a diet. You see, I’m
trying to lose weight.

DAvip: Well, I believe you should have eaten the ice
cream.

YOU: Burns, are you dense? I shouldn’t have because
I’m trying to lose weight. That’s what I’m try-
ing to tell you. How can I lose weight if I’m
eating ice cream?

DAVID: But in point of fact you did eat it.

212 David D. Burns, M.D.

YOu:

DAVID:

YOu:

DAVID:

YOu:

DAVID:

You:

DAVID:

YOU:

DAVID:

Yeah. That’s the problem. I shouldn’t have done
that. Now do you see the light?

And apparently you’re claiming that ‘‘things
should have been different’’ than they were. But
things were the way they were. And things usu-
ally are the way they are for a good reason. Why
do you think you did what you did? What’s the
reason you ate the ice cream?

Well, I was upset and I was nervous and I’m
basically a pig.

Okay, you were upset and you were nervous.
Have you had a pattern in your life of eating
when you’ve been upset and nervous?

Yeah. Right. I’ve never had any self-control.

So, wouldn’t it be natural to expect then that last
week when you were nervous you would do what
you have habitually done?

Yeah.

So, wouldn’t it be sensible therefore to conclude
that you should have done that because you had
a very long-standing habit of doing it?

I feel like you’re telling me that I should just
keep eating ice cream and end up like a fat pig
or something.

Most of my clients aren’t as difficult as you! At
any rate, I’m not telling you to act like a pig,
and [’m not recommending you continue this bad
habit of eating when you’re upset. What I’m
saying is that you’re giving yourself two prob-
lems for the price of one. One is that you did in
fact break your diet. If you’re going to lose
weight, this will slow you down. And the second
problem is that you’re being hard on yourself
about having done that. The second headache
you don’t need.

FEELING GOOD 213

You: So you’re saying that because I have a habit of
eating when I’m nervous it’s predictable that un-
til I learn some methods for changing the habit,
I’] continue to do itt.

Davip: I wish I’d said it that well myself!

You: Therefore, | should have eaten the ice cream
because I haven’t changed the habit yet. As long
as the habit continues, I will and should keep
overeating when I’m nervous. I see what you
mean. I feel a whole lot better, Doctor, except
for one thing. How can [ learn to stop doing this?
How can I develop some strategies for modifying
my behavior in a more productive way?

DavibD: You can motivate yourself with a whip or a car-
rot. When you tell yourself, ‘‘I should do this’’
or ‘‘I shouldn't do that’’ all day long, you get
bogged down with a shouldy approach to life.
And you already know what you end up with—
emotional constipation. If you’d rather get things
moving instead, | suggest you try to motivate
yourself through rewards rather than punishment.
You might find that these work more effectively.

In my case I used the **Dots and doughnuts’”’ diet. Mason
Dots (a gum candy) and glazed doughnuts are two of my
favorite sweets. I found that the most difficult time to control
my eating was in the evening when I was studying or watch-
ing TV. I’d have an urge to eat ice cream. So, | told myself
that if I controlled this urge, I could reward myself with a
big, fresh, glazed doughnut in the morning and a box of
Mason Dots in the evening. Then I’d concentrate on how
good they’d taste, and this helped me forget the ice cream.
Incidentally, | also had the rule that if I did goof up and
eat the ice cream, I could still have the Dots and the dough-
nut as a reward for trying or as a commiseration for slipping
back. Either way it helped me, and I lost over fifty pounds
this way.

214 David D. Burns, M.D.

I also made up the following syllogism:

(A) Human beings on diets goof up from time to time.
(B) I’m a human being.
(C) Therefore, | should goof up from time to time.

This helped me greatly too, and it enabled me to binge on
weekends and feel good about it. I usually lost more dur-
ing the week than I gained on weekends; so, overall I lost
weight and enjoyed myself. Every time I goofed up in my
diet I didn’t allow myself to criticize the lapse or feel guilty.
I began to think about it as the ‘‘Binge-on-whatever-you
want - whenever - you - want - to- without - guilt - and - enjoy - it
diet,’’ and it was so much fun it was a mild disappointment
when I finally achieved my aimed-for weight. I actually lost
over ten more pounds at that point because the diet was so
enjoyable. I believe that the proper attitude and feelings are
the key. With them you can move mountains—even moun-
tains of flesh.

The major thing that holds you back when you’re trying
to change a bad habit like eating, smoking, or drinking too
much is your belief you are out of control. The cause of
this lack of control is those should statements. They defeat
you. Suppose, for example, you are trying to avoid eating
ice cream. There you are watching TV, saying, ‘Oh, |
really should study and | shouldn’t eat any ice cream.’’ Now
ask yourself, ‘“‘How do [I feel when I say these things to
myself ?’’ I] think you know the answer: You feel guilty and
nervous. Then what do you do? You go and eat! That is
the point. The reason you’re eating is that you’re telling
yourself you shouldn’t! Then you try to bury your guilt and
anxiety under more piles of food.

Another simple should removal technique involves your
wrist counter. Once you become convinced that the shoulds
are not to your advantage, you can count them. Every time
you make a should statement, click the counter. If you do
this, be sure to set up a reward system based on the daily

FEELING GOOD 215

total. The more shoulds you spot this way, the greater the
reward you deserve. Over a period of several weeks, your
daily total of should statements will begin to go down, and
you'll notice you’re feeling less guilty.

Another should removal technique zeroes in on the fact
that you don’t really trust yourself. You may believe that
without all these should statements you would just turn wild
and go on a rampage of destruction or murder, or even ice-
cream eating. A way to evaluate this is to ask yourself if
there was any period in your life when you were particularly
happy and felt reasonably fulfilled, productive, and under
control. Think it over for a moment before you read on,
and make sure you have a mental picture of this time. Now
ask yourself, ‘‘During that period in my life, was I whipping
myself with a lot of should statements?’’ I believe your
answer will be no. Now tell me—were you doing all these
wild, terrible things then? I think you’ll realize you were
‘*should-free’’ and under control. This is proof that you can
lead a productive, happy life without all those shoulds.

You can test this hypothesis with an experiment in the
next couple of weeks. Try reducing your should statements
using these various techniques, and then see what happens
to your mood and self-control. I think you’ll be pleased.

Another method that you can fall back on 1s the obses-
sional-filibuster technique described in Chapter 4. Schedule
two minutes three times a day to recite all your should
statements and self-persecutions out loud: ‘‘I should have
gone to the market before it closed,’’ and *‘I shouldn’t have
picked my nose at the country club,’’ and ‘‘I’m such a
rotten bum,’’ etc. Just rattle off all the most abusive self-
criticisms you can think of. It might be especially helpful
to write them down or dictate them into a tape recorder.
Then read them later out loud, or listen to the tape. I think
this will help you see how ludicrous these statements are.
Try to limit your shoulds to these scheduled periods so you
won't be bothered by them at other times.

Another technique to combat should statements involves
getting in touch with the limits of your knowledge. When

216 David D. Burns, M.D.

I was growing up, | often heard people say, ‘‘Learn to accept
your limits and you’ll become a happier person,’’ but no
one ever bothered to explain what this meant or how to go
about doing it. Furthermore, it always sounded like a bit of
a put-down, as if they were saying, “‘Learn what a second-
rate dud you actually are.”’

In reality, it’s not as bad as all that. Suppose you fre-
quently look into the past and mope about your mistakes.
For example, as you review the financial section of the
paper, you tell yourself, *“I shouldn’t have bought that stock.
It’s gone down two points.’’ As a way out of this trap, ask
yourself, ‘“Now, at the time J bought the stock, did I know
it was going to go down in value?’’ I suspect you’l! say no.
Now ask, ‘‘If I'd known it was going down, would | have
bought it?’’ Again you'll answer no. So what you’re really
saying is that if you’d known this at the time, you’d have
acted differently. To do this you would have to be able to
predict the future with absolute certainty. Can you predict
the future with absolute certainty? Again your answer must
be no. You have two options: You can either decide to
accept yourself as an imperfect human being with limited
knowledge and realize that you will at times make mistakes,
or you can hate yourself for it.

Another effective way to combat shoulds is to ask, ‘‘Why
should [?’’ Then you can challenge the evidence you come
up with so as to expose the faulty logic. In this way you
can reduce your should statement to the level of absurdity.
Suppose, for example, you hire someone to do some work
for you. It could be lawn work, or a painting job, or any-
thing. When he submits his bill, it seems higher than you
understood it would be, but he gives you some fast talk, so
you give in and end up paying his price. You feel taken
advantage of. You begin to berate yourself for not acting
more firmly. Let’s do some role-playing, and you can pre-
tend that you’re the poor sucker who paid too much.

You: Yesterday I should have told that guy that his
bill was too high.

DAVID:

YOu:

DAVID:

You:

DAVID:

YOU:

DAVID:

FEELING GOOD 217

You should have told him that he gave you a
lower estimate?

Yeah. I should have been more assertive.

Why should you have? | agree that it would have
been to your advantage to speak up for yourself.
You can work on developing your assertive skills
so that in the future you’l!l do better in situations
like that. But the point is: Why should you have
been more effective yesterday?

Well, because I’m always letting people take
advantage of me.

Okay, let’s think about your line of reasoning.
‘*Because I’m always letting people take advan-
tage of me, I should have been more assertive
yesterday.’’ Now—-what is the rational response
to this? Is there anything about your statement
that seems a little bit illogical? Is there anything
fishy about your reasoning?

Mmmm... let me think. Well, tn the first place,
it’s not exactly true that I’m a/ways letting people
take advantage of me. That would be an over-
generalization. | sometimes do get my way. In
fact, I can be quite demanding at times. Fur-
thermore, if it were true that J was always getting
taken advantage of in certain situations, then it
would follow that I should have behaved exactly
as I did since this is my habit. Until I’ve mastered
some new ways to deal with people, I’! probably
continue to have this problem.

Great. [ couldn’t have put it better. | see you’ve
been absorbing what I’ve been telling you about
should statements! I hope a// my readers are as
smart and attentive as you are! Are there any
other reasons you think you should have behaved
differently?

218 David D. Burns, M.D.

You: Uh, well, let me see. How about: I should have
been more assertive because I wouldn’t have had
to pay more than I owed?

Davib: Okay. Now what’s the rational response to that?
What is illogical about that argument?

You: Well, since I’m human I won’t always do the
right thing.

Davib: Exactly. In fact, the following syllogism may
help you. First premise: All human beings make
mistakes, like sometimes paying too much. Do
you agree with me so far?

You: Yes.

Davib: And what are you?
You: A human being.

Davib: And what follows?
You: I should make mistakes.
David: Right.

That should be enough should removal techniques for
you. Oops! I just did it myself! Let me say—it would be
nice tf you found those methods helpful. I think you'll find
that by reducing this mental tyranny, you'll feel better be-
cause you won’t be berating yourself. Instead of feeling
guilty, you can use your energy to make necessary changes
and enhance your self-control and productivity.

3. Learn to Stick to Your Guns. One of the big disad-
vantages of being guilt-prone is that others can and will use
this guilt to manipulate you. If you feel obligated to please
everyone, your family and friends will be able to coerce
you effectively into doing many things that may not be in
your best self-interest. To cite a trivial example, how many
social invitations have you halfheartedly accepted so as not
to hurt someone’s feelings? In this case the price you pay
for saying yes when you really would have preferred to say
no is not great. You only end up wasting one evening. And

FEELING GOOD 219

there is a payoff. You will avoid feeling guilty, and you
can fantasize that you are an especially nice person. Fur-
thermore, if you try to decline the invitation, the disap-
pointed host may say, ““But we are expecting you. Do you
mean you are going to let the old gang down? Aw, come
on.’’ And then what would you say? How would you feel?

Your obsession with pleasing others becomes more tragic
when your decisions become so dominated by guilt that you
end up trapped and miserable. The irony is that, more often
than not, the consequences of letting someone manipulate
you with guilt end up betng destructive not only to you but
to the other person. Although your guilt-motivated actions
are often based on your idealism, the inevitable effects of
giving in turn out to be quite the opposite.

For example, Margaret was a happily married twenty-
seven-year-old woman whose obese brother, a gambler,
tended to take advantage of her in a variety of ways. He
borrowed money when he ran short and often forgot to repay
it. When he was in town (often for several months at a time)
he assumed it was his right to eat dinner with her family
every night, to drink up the liquor, and to use her new car
whenever he wanted. She rationalized giving in to his de-
mands by saying: ‘‘If | asked him for a favor or needed his
help, he’d do the same for me. After all, a loving brother
and sister should help each other out. And besides, if I tried
to say no to him he’d explode and I might lose him. Then
I’d feel like / did something wrong.”’

At the same time, she was able to see the negative con-
sequences of continually giving in: (1) She was supporting
his dependent, self-defeating life-style and gambling addic-
tion; (2) She felt trapped and taken advantage of; (3) The
basis of the relationship was not love but blackmail—she
was constantly having to say yes to his demands to avoid
the tyranny of his temper and her own sense of guilt.

Margaret and I did some role-playing so she could learn
to say no and stick to her guns in a tactful but firm manner.
[ played Margaret’s role, and she pretended to be her
brother:

220 David D. Burns, M.D.

BROTHER

MARGARET
BROTHER:
MARGARET:
BROTHER:

MARGARET:
BROTHER:

MARGARET:

BROTHER:

MARGARET:

BROTHER:

MARGARET:

BROTHER:

MARGARET:

(played by Margaret): Are you using the car
tonight?

(played by me): I’m not planning to now.
Do you mind if I borrow it later?
I'd prefer that you don’t.

Why not? You’re not going to use it. It'll
just be sitting there.

Do you feel I’m obliged to loan it to you?

Well, I'd do the same for you tf | had a car
and you needed it.

I'm glad you feel that way. Although I’m
not planning to use the car, I'd like to have
it available in case I decide to go somewhere
later on.

But you’re not planning to use it! Haven't
we been brought up to help each other?

Yes we have. Do you think that means |
always have to say yes to you? We both do
a great deal for each other. You have made
a lot of use of my car and from now on I'd
feel more comfortable 1f you’d begin to ar-
range your own transportation.

I’m just planning to use it for an hour, so
Pil get it back in case you need it. It’s very
important and it’s only a half mile away, so
I won’t wear your car out, don’t worry.

It sounds like it is something tmportant to
you. Perhaps you can arrange some other
transportation. Could you walk that dis-
tance?

Oh, that’s fine! If that’s how you feel, don’t
come to me for any favors!

It sounds like you’re pretty mad because I’m
not doing what you want. Do you feel I’m
always obliged to say yes?

FEELING GOOD 221

BROTHER: You and your philosophy! Shove it! I refuse
to listen to any more of this hogwash! (Be-
gins to storm off).

MARGARET: Let’s not talk about it any further then.
Maybe in a couple of days you’ll feel more
like talking about it. I think we do need to
talk things over.

After this dialogue we reversed roles so that Margaret
could practice being more assertive. When I played her
brother’s role, I gave her as tough a time as | could, and
she learned how to handle me. This practice boosted her
courage. She felt it was helpful to keep certain principles
in mind when standing up to her brother’s manipulations.
These were: (1) She could remind him it was her right not
to say yes to all his demands. (2) She could find a grain of
truth in his arguments (the disarming technique) so as to
take the wind out of his sails, but she could then come back
to her position that love did not mean always giving in.
(3) She was to adopt a strong, decisive and uncompromising
position as tactfully as possible. (4) She was not to buy into
his role as a weak, inadequate little boy who couldn’t stand
on his own feet. (5) She was not to respond to his anger
by getting angry herself, because this would reinforce his
belief he was a victim who was being unjustly deprived by
a cruel, selfish witch. (6) She had to risk the possibility he
would temporarily withdraw and thwart her by refusing to
talk to her or to consider her point of view. When he did
this, she was to let him storm off but she could let him
know there were some things she wanted to talk over with
him later on when he was more in the mood to communicate.

When Margaret did confront him she found he was not
nearly as tough a customer as she imagined. He actually
seemed relieved and began to act more adult when she put
some limits on the relationship.

If you choose to apply this technique, you will have to
be determined to stick to your guns because the other guy
(or gal) may try to bluff you into believing that you’re

222 David D. Burns, M.D.

mortally wounding them by not giving in to their requests.
Remember that the hurt you inflict in the long run by not
following your best self-interest is usually far greater.
Practicing ahead of time is the key to success. A friend
will usually be happy to role-play with you and provide
some useful feedback. If such a person is not available to
you, or you feel too shy to ask, write out an imaginary
dialogue of the type illustrated. This will go a long way to
firing up the appropriate circuits in your brain so you'll have
the necessary courage and skill to say no diplomatically but
forcefully and make it stick when the time actually comes!

4. Antiwhiner Technique. This is one of the most sur-
prising, delightfully effective methods in this book. It works
like a charm in situations where someone—usually a loved
one—makes you feel frustrated, guilty, and helpless through
whining, complaining, and nagging. The typical pattern
works like this: The whiner complains to you about some-
thing or someone. You feel the sincere desire to be helpful,
so you make a suggestion. The person immediately squashes
your suggestion and complains again. You feel tense and
inadequate, so you try harder and make another suggestion.
You get the same response. Anytime you try to break loose
from the conversation, the other person implies he or she
is being abandoned, and you are flooded with guilt.

Shiba lived with her mother while she completed graduate
school. Shiba loved her mother, but found her constant
harangues about her divorce, the lack of money, etc., so
intolerable she sought treatment. I taught her the antiwhiner
method the first session, as follows: Regardless of what her
mother said, Shiba was to find some way to agree (the
disarming technique), and then instead of offering advice,
she was to say something genuinely complimentary. Shiba
initially found this approach astonishing and rather bizarre
because it differed radically from her usual approach. In the
following dialogue, I asked Shiba to play the role of Mother
while I played her role so | could demonstrate this technique:

FEELING GOOD) 223

SHIBA (as her mother): Do you know that during the
divorce proceedings it came out that your dad
sold his share in the business, and I was the last
person to know about it?

David (as Shiba): That’s absolutely correct. You didn’t
hear about it until the divorce proceedings. You
really deserve better.

SHIBA: I don’t know what we’re going to do for money.
How am I going to put your brothers through
college?

Davib: That is a problem. We are short on money.
SHIBA: It was just like your father to pull something like
this. His head isn’t screwed on straight.
Davib: He never was too good at budgeting. You've

always been much better at that.

SHIBA: He’s a louse! Here we are on the verge of pov-
erty. What if I get sick? We’ll end up in the
poorhouse!

Davip: You’re right! It’s no fun at all to live in the
poorhouse. | agree with you completely.

Shiba reported that in her role as Mother she found it
was ‘‘no fun’’ to complain because I kept agreeing with
her. We did a role-reversal so she could master the tech-
nique.

In fact, it is your urge to help complainers that maintains
the monotonous interaction. Paradoxically, when you agree
with their pessimistic whining, they quickly run out of
steam. Perhaps an explanation will make this seem less
puzzling. When people whine and complain, they are usu-
ally feeling irritated, overwhelmed, and insecure. When you
try to help them, this sounds to them like criticism because
it implies they aren’t handling things properly. In contrast,
when you agree with them and add a compliment, they feel
endorsed, and they then usually relax and quiet down.

5. Moorey Moaner Method. A useful modification of
this technique was proposed by Stirling Moorey, a brilliant

224 David D. Burns, M.D.

British medical student who studied with our group in Phil-
adelphia and sat in with me during therapy sessions during
the summer of 1979. He worked with a chronically severely
depressed fifty-two-year-old sculptor named Harriet with a
heart of gold. Harriet’s problem was her friends would often
bend her ear with gossip and personal problems. She found
these problems upsetting because of her excessive capacity
for empathy. Because she wouldn’t know how to help her
friends, she felt trapped and resentful until she learned the
‘‘Moorey Moaner Method.’’ Stirling simply instructed her
to find a way to agree with what the person was saying,
and then to distract the moaner by finding something positive
in the complaint and commenting on it. Here are several
examples:

1. MOANER: Oh, what in the world can I ever do about
my daughter? I’m afraid she’s been smok-
ing pot again.

RESPONSE: There sure is a lot of pot going around
these days. Is your daughter still doing
that outstanding art work? I heard she re-
cently got an important award.

2. MOANER: My boss didn’t give me my raise, and my
last raise was nearly a year ago. I’ve been
here for twenty years, and I think I deserve
better.

RESPONSE: You certainly do have seniority here and
you've made tremendous contributions.
Tell me, what was it like when you first
Started working twenty years ago? Ill bet
things were a lot different then.

3. MOANER: My husband never seems to have enough
time at home. Every night he’s out with
that darned bowling league.

RESPONSE: Weren’t you also doing some bowling re-
cently? I heard you got some pretty high
scores yourself!

FEELING GOOD 225

Harriet mastered the Moorey Moaner Method quickly and
reported a dramatic change in her mood and outlook because
it gave her a simple, effective way to handle a problem that
had been very real and overwhelming. When she returned
for the next session, her depression—which had crippled
her for over a decade—had lifted and was entirely gone.
She was bubbling and joyous, and heaped well-deserved
praise on Stirling’s head. If you have a similar problem with
your mother, mother-in-law, or friends, try Stirling’s
method. Like Harriet, you’ll soon be smiling!

6. Developing Perspective. One of the commonest dis-
tortions that leads to a sense of guilt is personalization—
the misguided notion that you are ultimately responsible for
other people’s feelings and actions or for naturally occurring
events. An obvious example would be your sense of guilt
when it rained unexpectedly on the day of a large picnic
you had organized to honor the retiring president of your
club. In this case you could probably shake your absurd
reaction off without a great deal of effort because you clearly
cannot control the weather.

Guilt becomes much more difficult to overcome when
someone suffers substantial pain and discomfort and insists
it results from their personal interaction with you. In such
cases it can be helpful to clarify the extent to which you
can realistically assume responsibility. Where does your
responsibility end and the other person’s begin? The tech-
nical name for this is “‘disattribution,’’ but you might call
it putting things into perspective.

Here’s how it works. Jed was a mildly depressed college
student whose twin brother, Ted, was so seriously depressed
he dropped out of school and began to live like a recluse
with his parents. Jed felt guilty about his brother’s depres-
sion. Why? Jed told me he had always been more outgoing
and hardworking than his brother. Consequently, from early
childhood he always made better grades and had more
friends than Ted. Jed reasoned that the social and academic
success he enjoyed caused his brother to feel inferior and

226 David D. Burns, M.D.

left out. Consequently, Jed concluded that he was the cause
of Ted’s depression.

He then carried this line of reasoning to its illogical ex-
treme and hypothesized that by feeling depressed himself,
he might help Ted stop feeling depressed and inferior
through some type of reverse (or perverse) psychology.
When he went home for the holidays, Jed avoided the usual
social activities, minimized his academic success, and em-
phasized how blue he was feeling. Jed made sure he gave
his brother the loud and clear message that he too was down
and out.

Jed took his plan so seriously that he was quite hesitant
to apply the mood-control techniques I was trying to teach
him. In fact, he was downright resistant at first because he
felt guilty about getting better and feared his recovery might
have a devastating impact on Ted.

Like most personalization errors, Jed’s painful illusion
that he was at fault for his brother’s depression contained
enough half-truths to sound persuasive. After all, his brother
probably had felt inferior and inadequate since early child-
hood and undoubtedly did harbor some jealous resentment
of Jed’s success and happiness. But the crucial questions
were: Did it follow that Jed caused his brother’s depression,
and could Jed effectively reverse the situation by making
himself miserable?

In order to help him assess his role in a more objective
way, | suggested Jed use the triple-column technique (Figure
8~—4). As a result of the exercise, he was able to see that
his guilty thoughts were self-defeating and illogical. He
reasoned that Ted’s depression and sense of inferiority were
ultimately caused by Ted’s distorted thinking and not by
his own happiness or success. For Jed to try to correct this
by making himself miserable was as illogical as trying to
put out a fire with gasoline. As Jed grasped this, his guilt
and depression rapidly lifted, and he was soon back to
normal functioning.

‘Aypiqrsuodsal sty
SE SIU) AJOIBUI[ A “WITYy ads0} JOUURD |
Inq ‘SSUI} OP 0} WY sdBINOOUD Ue |

‘adoy sty Aeme saye)
SIy} asnedaq Sd0p dU Se s[QRIaSsIU se
ov | Jl OW pay sassaidap Ajuo A]qe
-qoid }] “OWIT] poos & ZuIABY pu JoNeq
SUIjD0j Wy SmOUYX oy JI adoy awos
WIy sald pue dn pay 904d IYSIwW 3

“JOUURU PSHOISIP ‘SAVSOU eB Ul BUI
-JUICIDIUL SE PAT, JEU) JUDWIUOIIAUD 3y)
Jo wed Bulag Jo yey) st aye) ued | JEU)
Aytjiqisuodsas A[uo ayy ‘uoissaidap siy
ZuUISNeS aie Jey) SApNINIe pue sysnow)
fe1soyl Spay si ay  ‘“uotssaidap

Spay jo asned oy} JOU We jjasAW | *]

UONPZIFEUOSIOd

(JOLIO

J9][9} DUNTIOJ)
SUOISN[SUOD
0} suiduing

uonezipeuosiad
‘(Suipeay puri)
SUOISN]OUOS
0} sulduing

‘uonen
“HIS dU) 3991109 07 ANIqisuodsas AU! SI 11
‘Zuiyjou SuIOp puNose SUINIS SI PI] Jy

oa

‘ZuIgIOU SUIOP DUO Te SWOY SI sy
J[IYM FOODS Je SUIT] POOs & BUIARY SEM
] WIY pjor | J! pay rosdn pynom [aay |

N

‘[NJSsaoons sIOW! Uudaq pure
Joprey poysiom sABmMye aaey | ‘pooypyiiys
Ajiea souls diysuoneyas ino 0} anp UOIS
-saidap S$ pay Joj asneo ay] jo ued wey] ‘|

sasuodsay JouOoNDyY

UONAOISIG, aA1UsOD

Siysnoy [ JNoWOINy

‘p—-@ ounbiy


‘ayy Aw dn Zurydjoq
Aq Adenbapeul Jo asuas sity ayeurwitya
},ues | ‘Addey aq ued | yey) wy su
-Moys Aq WIY JO} [BPOU! 3j01 POOS B aq
Ajqissod ues j “wiy s8einosus Ajjenjoe
WYstur styy ‘suraoidu we | yeu} saas
oy JJ “UMOP passeIp 39q 0} dU JUeM
},USSOP SY SUI PfO} USAS sey dH “WIY

0} [njdyoy aq [[IM uOIssoidap Aw JEU) (SuUIpeol pul) ‘passaidap wre | jr wiry djay [jim u

YUIY) 0} UOSBAI OU SI JIB] “SuUOTOR STY suoisnjouos JOB] UT ‘JfOsAw JO} SuryAue Suiop 30U

jo juspuadapul A]j#e10) are suonoe AWW ‘p Oo} sulduinge “p Aq wiy 40j 8uimjowos sulop aq [JIM [ ‘p
sasuodsay jpuoupy UONAOISIG) aA1NUsO7) siy8noy | JDWwomy

‘yUu09 «*p—Q aunbBig

Part Ill

“Realistic” Depressions


Chapter 9

Sadness Is Not Depression

‘*Dr. Burns, you seem to be claiming that distorted thinking
is the only cause of depression. But what if my problems
are real?’’ This is one of the most frequent questions |
encounter during lectures and workshops on cognitive ther-
apy. Many patients raise it at the start of treatment, and list
a number of ‘‘realistic’’ problems which they are convinced
cause ‘‘realistic depressions.’’ The most common are:

bankruptcy or poverty;

old age (some people also view infancy, childhood,
adolescence, young adulthood and mid-life as periods
of inevitable crisis);

permanent physical disability;

terminal illness;

the tragic loss of a loved one.

I’m sure you could add to the list. However, none of the
above can lead to a ‘‘realistic depression.’’ There is, in fact,
no such thing! The real question here is how to draw the
line between desirable and undesirable negative feelings.
What is the difference between ‘‘healthy sadness’’ and
depression?

The distinction is simple. Sadness is a normal emotion
created by realistic perceptions that describe a negative event
involving loss or disappointment in an undistorted way.

231

232 David D. Burns, M.D.

Depression 1s an illness that always results from thoughts
that are distorted in some way. For example, when a loved
one dies, you validly think, ‘‘I lost him (or her), and I will
miss the companionship and love we shared.’’ The feelings
such a thought creates are tender, realistic, and desirable.
Your emotions will enhance your humanity and add depth
to the meaning of life. In this way you gain from your loss.

In contrast, you might tell yourself, ‘‘I’ll never again be
happy because he (or she) died. It’s unfair!’’ These thoughts
will trigger in you feelings of self-pity and hopelessness.
Because these emotions are based entirely on distortion,
they will defeat you.

Either depression or sadness can develop after a loss or
a failure in your efforts to reach a goal of great personal
importance. Sadness comes, however, without distortion.
It involves a flow of feeling and therefore has a time limit.
It never involves a lessening of your self-esteem. Depression
is frozen—it tends to persist or recur indefinitely, and always
involves loss of self-esteem.

When a depression clearly appears after an obvious stress,
such as ill health, the death of a loved one, or a business
reversal, it is sometimes called a “‘reactive depression.’’ At
times it can be more difficult to identify the stressful event
that triggered the episode. Those depressions are often called
‘‘endogenous’’ because the symptoms seem to be generated
entirely out of thin air. In both cases, however, the cause
of the depression is identical—your distorted, negative
thoughts. It has no adaptive or positive function whatsoever,
and represents one of the worst forms of suffering. Its only
redeeming value is the growth you experience when you
recover from it.

My point is this: When a genuinely negative event occurs,
your emotions will be created exclusively by your thoughts
and perceptions. Your feelings will result from the meaning
you attach to what happens. A substantial portion of your
suffering will be due to the distortions in your thoughts.
When you eliminate these distortions, you will find that
coping with the ‘“‘real problem’’ will become less painful.

FEELING GOOD 233

Let’s see how thts works. One clearly realistic problem
involves serious illness, such as a malignancy. It is unfor-
tunate that the family and friends of the afflicted person are
often so convinced that it is normal for the patient to feel
depressed, they fail to inquire about the cause of the depres-
sion, which more often than not turns out to be completely
reversible. In fact, some of the easiest depressions to resolve
are those found in people facing probable death. Do you
know why? These courageous individuals are often ‘‘su-
percopers’’ who haven’t made misery their life-style. They
are usually willing to help themselves in any way they can.
This attitude rarely fails to transform apparently irreversible
and ‘‘real’’ difficulties into opportunities for personal
growth. This is why I find the concept of *‘realistic depres-
sions’’ so personally abhorrent. The attitude that depression
is necessary strikes me as destructive, inhuman, and vic-
timizing. Let’s get down to some specifics, and you can
judge for yourself.

Loss of Life. Naomi was in her mid-forties when she
received a report from her doctor that a ‘‘spot’’ had appeared
on her chest X ray. She was a firm believer that going to
doctors was a way of asking for trouble, so she procrastin-
ated many months in checking this report out. When she
did, her worst suspicions were validated. A painful needle
biopsy confirmed the presence of malignant cells, and sub-
sequent lung removal indicated that a spread of the cancer
had already occurred.

This news hit Naomi and her family like a hand grenade.
As the months wore on, she became increasingly despond-
ent over her weakened state. Why? It was not so much
the physical discomfort from the disease process or the
chemotherapy, although these were genuinely uncomfort-
able, but the fact that she was sufficiently weak that she
had to give up the daily activities that had meant a great
deal to her sense of identity and pride. She could no longer
work around the house (now her husband had to do most
of the chores), and she had to give up her two part-time

234 David D. Burns, M.D.

jobs, one of which was volunteer reading for the blind.

You might insist, ‘“Naomi’s problems are real. Her misery
is not caused by distortion. It’s caused by the situation.”’

But was her depression so inevitable? I asked Naomi
why her lack of activity was so upsetting. I explained the
concept of ‘‘automatic thoughts,’’ and she wrote down the
following negative cognitions: (1) I’m not contributing to
society; (2) ’'m not accomplishing in my own personal
realm; (3) I’m not able to participate in active fun; and (4)
J am a drain and drag on my husband. The emotions as-
sociated with these thoughts were: anger, sadness, frustra-
tion, and guilt.

When I saw what she had written down, my heart leaped
for joy! These thoughts were no different from the thoughts
of physically healthy depressed patients I see every day in
my practice. Naomi’s depression was not caused by her
malignancy, but the malignant attitude that caused her to
measure her sense of worth by the amount she produced!
Because she had always equated her personal worth with
her achievements, the cancer meant—‘‘You’re over the
hill! You’re ready for the refuse heap!’’ This gave me a
way to intervene!

I suggested that she make a graph of her personal
‘‘worth’’ from the moment of birth to the moment of death
(see Figure 9-1, page 235). She saw her worth as a constant,
estimating it at 85 percent on an imaginary scale from 0 to
100 percent. I also asked her to estimate her productivity
over the same period on a similar scale. She drew a curve
with low productivity in infancy, increasing to a maximum
plateau in adulthood, and finally decreasing again later in
life (see Figure 9-1). So far, so good. Then two things
suddenly dawned on her. First, while her illness had reduced
her productivity, she still contributed to herself and her
family in numerous small but nevertheless important and
precious ways. Only all-or-nothing thinking could make her
think her contributions were a zero. Second, and much more
important, she realized her personal worth was constant and
steady; it was a given that was unrelated to her achieve-

SELF-ESTEEM—WORTH AS A
HUMAN BEING

ed
©
©

~
On

45 now

HUMAN WORTH SCALE
mR

©

10 20 30 40 50 60 £=70
AGE (in years)

TOTAL CONTRIBUTION TO SOCIETY,
FAMILY AND SELF

100 4

75
90

25

PRODUCTIVITY SCALE

AGE (in years)

Figure 9—1. Naomi’s worth and work graphs. In the upper figure
Naomi plotted her human “worth” from the time of her birth to
the time of her death. She estimated this at 85 percent. In the
lower figure she plotted her estimated productivity and achieve-
ment over the course of her life. Her productivity began low in
childhood, reached a plateau in adulthood, and would ultimately
fall to zero at the time of death. This graph helped her comprehend
that her “worth” and “achievement” were unrelated and had no
correlation with each other.

236 David D. Burns, M.D.

ments. This meant that her human worth did not have to
be earned, and she was every bit as precious in her weak-
ened state. A smile spread across her face, and her depres-
sion melted in that moment. It was a real pleasure for me
to witness and participate in this small miracle. It did not
eliminate the tumor, but it did restore her missing self-
esteem, and that made all the difference in the way she felt.

Naomi was not a patient, but someone I spoke with while
vacationing in my home state of California during the win-
ter of 1976. I received a letter from her soon after which I
share with you here:

David—

An incredibly belated, but really important ‘‘P.S.’’ to my
last letter to you. To wit: the simple little ‘‘graphs’’ you
did of productivity as opposed to self-worth or self-
esteem or whatever we shall call it: It has been especially
sustaining to me, a plus which I dose out liberally! It
really turned me into a psychologist without having to
go for my Ph.D. I find that it works with lots of things
that badger and bother people. I’ve tried these ideas out
on some of my friends. Stephanie is treated like a piece
of furniture by a chit of a secretary one-third her age;
Sue is put down constantly by her 14 year old twins;
Becky’s husband has just walked out; Ilga is being made
to feel like an interloper by her boy friend’s 17 year old
son, etc. To them all I say ‘‘Yes, but your personal worth
is a CONSTANT, and all the garbage the world heaps on
you doesn’t touch it!’’ Of course in many cases I realize
it’s an over-simplification and cannot be an anodyne for
all things, but boy is it helpful and useful!

Again, thank you, sir!
AS ever,

Naomi

She died in pain but with dignity six months later.

FEELING GOOD 237

Loss of Limb, Physical handicaps represent a second cat-
egory of problems felt to be “‘realistic.’’ The afflicted in-
dividual—or the family members—automatically assume
that the limitations imposed by old age or by a physical
disability, such as an amputation or blindness, necessarily
imply a decreased capacity for happiness. Friends tend to
offer understanding and sympathy, thinking this represents
a humane and ‘“‘realistic’’ response. The case can be quite
the opposite, however. The emotional suffering may be
caused by twisted thinking rather than by a twisted body.
In such a situation, a sympathetic response can have the
undesirable effect of reinforcing self-pity as well as feeding
into the attitude that the handicapped individual is doomed
to less joy and satisfaction than others. In contrast, when
the afflicted individual or family members learn to correct
the distortions in their thinking, a full and gratifying emo-
tional life can frequently result.

For example, Fran is a _ thirty-five-year-old married
mother of two, who began to experience symptoms of
depression around the time her husband’s right leg became
irreversibly paralyzed because of a spinal injury. For six
years she sought relief from her intensifying sense of
despair, and received a variety of treatments in and out
of hospitals, including antidepressant drugs as well as
electroshock therapy. Nothing helped. She was in a severe
depression when she came to me, and she felt her problems
were insoluble.

In tears she described the frustration she experienced in
trying to cope with her husband’s decreased mobility:

Every time I see other couples doing things we can’t
do tears come to my eyes. I look at couples taking
walks, jumping in the swimming pool or the ocean,
riding bikes together, and it just hurts. Things like that
would be pretty tough for me and John to do. They
take it for granted just like we used to. Now it would
be so good and wonderful if we could do it. But you
know, and I know, and John knows—we can’t.

238 David D. Burns, M.D.

At first, I too had the feeling Fran’s problem was realistic.
After all, they couldn’t do many things that most of us can
do. And the same could be said of old people, as well as
those who are blind or deaf or who have had a limb am-
putated.

In fact, when you think of it, we all have limitations. So
perhaps we should all be miserable . . .? As I puzzled over
this, Fran’s distortion suddenly came to my mind. Do you
know what it is? Look at the list on page 42 nght now and
see if you can pick it out. . . that’s right, the distortion that
led to Fran’s needless misery was the mental filter. Fran
was picking out and dwelling on each and every activity
that was unavailable to her. At the same time the many
things she and John could or might do together did not enter
her conscious mind. No wonder she felt life was empty and
dreary.

The solution turned out to be surprisingly simple. I pro-
posed the following to Fran: ‘‘Suppose at home between
sessions you were to make a list of all the things that you
and John can do together. Rather than focus on things that
you and John can’t do, learn to focus on the ones you can
do. I, for example, would love to go to the moon, but I
don’t happen to be an astronaut, so it’s not likely I'll ever
get the opportunity. Now, if I focused on the fact that in
my profession and at my age it is extremely unlikely I could
ever get to the moon, I could make myself very upset. On
the other hand, there are many things I can do, and if I
focus on these, then I won’t feel disappointed. Now, what
would be some things you and John can do as a couple?”’

FRAN: Well, we enjoy each other’s company still. We
go out to dinner, and we’re buddies.

Davib: Okay. What else?

FRAN: We go for rides together, we play cards. Movies,
Bingo. He’s teaching me how to drive...

DaviD: You see, in less than thirty seconds you've al-
ready listed six things you can do together. Sup-

FEELING GOOD 239

pose I gave you between now and next session
to continue the list. How many items do you
think you could come up with?

FRAN: Quite a lot of them. I could come up with things
we've never thought of, maybe something un-
usual like skydiving.

Davib: Right. You might even come up with some more
adventurous ideas. Keep in mind that you and
John might in fact be able to do many things you
are assuming you can’t do. For example, you
told me you can’t go to the beach. You mentioned
how much you'd like to go swimming. Could
you go to a beach that’s a little more secluded
so you wouldn’t have to feel quite so self-
conscious? If I were on a beach and you and John
were there, his physical disability wouldn’t make
one darn bit of difference to me. In fact, I re-
cently visited a fine beach on the North Shore of
Lake Tahoe in California with my wife and her
family. As we were swimming, we suddenly
happened upon a cove that had a nude beach,
and here were all these young people with no
clothes on. Of course, I didn’t actually look at
any of them, I want you to understand! But in
spite of this I did happen to notice that one young
man had his right leg missing from the knee
down, and he was there having fun with the rest
of them. So I’m not absolutely convinced that
just because someone ts crippled or missing a
limb they can’t go to the beach and have fun.
What do you think?

Some people might scoff at the idea that such a ‘ ‘difficult
and real’’ problem could be so easily resolved, or that an
intractable depression like Fran’s could turn around in re-
sponse to such a simple intervention. She did in fact report
a complete disappearance of her uncomfortable feelings and

240 David D. Burns, M.D.

said she felt the best she had in years at the end of the
session. In order to maintain such improvement, she will
obviously need to make a consistent effort to change her
thinking patterns over a period of time so she can overcome
her bad habit of spinning an intricate mental web and getting
trapped in it.

Loss of Job. Most people find the threat of a career re-
versal or the loss of livelihood a potentially incapacitating
emotional blow because of the widespread assumption in
Western culture that individual worth and one’s capacity for
happiness are directly linked with professional success.
Given this value system, it seems obvious and realistic to
anticipate that emotional depression would be inevitably
linked with financial loss, career failure, or bankruptcy.

If this 1s how you feel, I think you would be interested
in knowing Hal. Hal ts a personable forty-five-year-old fa-
ther of three, who worked for seventeen years with his wife’s
father in a successful merchandising firm. Three years be-
fore he was referred to me for treatment, Hal and his father-
in-law had a series of disputes about the management of the
firm. Hal resigned in a moment of anger, thus giving up
his interests in the company. For the next three years, he
bounced around from job to job, but had difficulty finding
satisfactory employment. He didn’t seem to be able to suc-
ceed at anything and began to view himself as a failure.
His wife started working full time to make ends meet, and
this added to Hal’s sense of humiliation because he had
always prided himself on being the breadwinner. As the
months and years rolled on, his financial situation worsened,
and he experienced increasing depression as his self-esteem
bottomed out.

When I first met Hal, he had been attempting to work
for three months as a trainee in commercial real-estate sales.
He had rented several buildings, but had not yet finalized
a sale. Because he was working on a strict commission basis,
his income during this break-in period was quite low. He
was plagued by depression and procrastination. He would

FEELING GOOD 241

at times stay at home in bed all day, thinking to himself,
‘“What’s the use? I’m just a loser. There’s no point in going
to work. It’s less painful to stay in bed.”’

Hal volunteered to permit the psychiatric residents in our
training program at the University of Pennsylvania to ob-
serve one of our psychotherapy sessions through a one-way
mirror. During this session, Hal described a conversation
in the locker room of his club. A well-to-do friend had
informed Hal of his interest in the purchase of a particular
building. You might think he would have jumped for joy
on learning this, since the commission from such a sale
would have given his career, confidence, and bank account
a much needed boost. Instead of pursuing the contact, Hal
procrastinated several weeks. Why? Because of his thought,
‘*It’s too complicated to sell a commercial property. |’ve
never done this before. Anyway, he’ll probably back out at
the last minute. That would mean | couldn’t make it in this
business. It would mean I was a failure.’’

Afterward, I reviewed the session with the residents. |
wanted to know what they thought about Hal’s pessimistic,
self-defeating attitudes. They felt that Hal did in fact have
a good aptitude for sales work, and that he was being un-
realistically hard on himself. I used this as ammunition
during the next session. Hal admitted that he was more
critical of himself than he would ever be toward anyone
else. For example, if one of his associates lost a big sale,
he’d simply say, “‘It’s not the end of the world; keep plug-
ging.’’ But tf it happened to him he’d say, ‘‘I’m a loser.”’
Essentially, Hal admitted he was operating on a ‘‘double
standard’ ’—tolerant and supportive toward other people but
harsh, critical, and punitive toward himself. You may have
the same tendency. Hal initially defended his double stan-
dard by arguing it would be helpful to him:

HAL: Well, first of all, the responsibility and interest
that | have in the other person is not the same
as the responsibility that I have for myself.

DaviD: Okay. Tell me more.

242 David D. Burns, M.D.

HAL: If they don’t succeed, it’s not going to be bread
off my table, or create any negative feelings
within my family unit. So the only reason I’m
interested in them is because it’s nice to have
everybody succeed, but there...

Davip: Wait—wait—wait! You’re interested in them be-
cause it’s nice to have them succeed?

HaL: Yeah. I said...

Davip: The standard you apply to them is one that you
think would help them succeed?

Hac: Right.

Davip: And is the standard you apply to yourself the one
that will help you succeed? How do you feel
when you say, ‘‘One missed sale means I’m a
failure’’?

HAL: _Discouraged.

Davipb: Is this helpful?

HaL: Well, it hasn’t produced positive results, so ap-
parently it’s not helpful.

Davip: And is it realistic to say ‘‘One missed sale and
I’m a failure’’?

Hat: Not really.

Davipb: So why are you using this all-or-nothing standard

on yourself? Why would you apply helpful and
realistic standards to these other people who you
don’t care so much about and self-defeating,
hurtful standards to yourself who you do care
something about?

Hal was beginning to grasp that it wasn’t helping him to

live by a double standard. He judged himself by harsh rules
that he would never apply to anyone else. He initially de-
fended this tendency—as many demanding perfectionists
will—by claiming it would help him in some way to be so

FEELING GOOD 243

much harder on himself than on others. However, he then
quickly owned up to the fact that his personal standards
were actually unrealistic and self-defeating because if he
did try to sell the building and didn’t succeed, he would
view it as a catastrophe. His bad habit of all-or-nothing
thinking was the key to the fear that paralyzed him and kept
him from trying. Consequently, he spent most of his time
in bed, moping.

Hal asked for some specific guidelines concerning things
he might do to rid himself of his perfectionistic double
standards so that he could judge all individuals, including
himself, by one objective set of standards. I proposed that
as a first step, Hal might use the automatic-thought, rational-
response technique. For example, if he were sitting at home
procrastinating about work, he might be thinking, “‘If I don’t
go to work early and stay all day and get caught up on all
my work, there’s no point in even trying. I might as well
lie in bed.’’ After writing this down, he would substitute a
rational response, ‘‘This is just all-or-nothing thinking, and
it’s baloney. Even going to work for a half day could be
an important step and might make me feel better.”’

Hal agreed to write down a number of upsetting thoughts
before the next therapy session at those times he felt worth-
less and down on himself. (See Figure 9-2, page 244.) Two
days later he received a layoff notice from his employer,
and he came to the next session highly convinced his self-
critical thoughts were absolutely valid and realistic. He’d
been unable to come up with a single rational response. The
notice implied that his failure to show up at work neces-
sitated his release from his job. During the session, we
discussed how he could learn to talk back to his critical
voice.

Davipb: Okay, now let’s see if we can write down some
answers to your negative thoughts In the Rational
Response column. Can you think of any answer
based on what we talked about last session? Con-

244 David D. Burns, M.D.

_ Figure9—2. Hal’shomework for recording and challenging his self-

| Critical thoughts. He wrote down the Rational Responses during the

_ therapy session (see text).
enemas

| Negative Thoughts Rational Responses
| (SELF-CRITICISM) (SELF-DEFENSE)
annie tea
!. Tam lazy. 1. [ have worked hard much of
my life.

ho

2. Lenjoy being ill. . it’s not fun.

3. | am inadequate. !am 3. I’ve had some degree of suc-
a failure. cess. We've had a good home.
We've reared three outstand-

ing children. People admire

and respect me. I have in-

volved myself in community

activity.

4. This lying around 4. | am experiencing symptoms
doing nothing repre- of an illness. It’s not the ‘‘real
sents the real me. me.”’

5. I could have done 5. At least I did more than most
more. people. It’s meaningless and

pointless to say, “‘I could have
done more’’ because anyone
could say this.

sider your statement ‘‘l am inadequate.’’ Would
this in any way result from your all-or-nothing
thinking and perfectionistic standards?

The answer might be clearer to you if we do
a role-reversal. It’s sometimes easier to speak
objectively about someone else. Suppose I came
to you with your story and told you that I was
employed by my wife’s father. Three years ago
we had a fight. I felt | was being taken advantage
of. I walked out. I’ve kinda been feeling blue
ever since that time, and I’ ve been tossing around
from job to job. Now I’ve been fired from a job

HAL:

DAVID:

HAL:

DAVID:

HAL:
DAVID:

HAL:

DAVID:

DAVID:
HAL:
DAVID:

FEELING GOOD 245

that was purely on a commission basis, and that’s
really a double defeat for me. In the first place,
they didn’t pay me anything, and then in the
second place, they didn’t even figure I was worth
that much, so they fired me. I’ ve concluded that
I’m inadequate—an inadequate human being.
What would you say to me?

Well, I. . . assuming that you’d gotten up to that
point, say the first forty years or more of your
life, you obviously were doing something.

Okay, write that down in the Rational Response
column. Make a list of all the good, adequate
things you did for the first forty years of your
life. You’ve earned money, you’ve raised chil-
dren who were successful, etc., etc.

Okay. [ can write down that I’ve had some suc-
cess. We’ve had a good home. We’ve reared
three outstanding children. People admire and
respect me, and I have involved myself in com-
munity activities.

Okay, now those are all the things you’ ve done.
How do you reconcile this with your belief that
you are inadequate?

Well, I could have done more.

Great! I was certain you’d figure out a clever
way to disqualify your good points. Now write
that down as another negative thought: ‘‘I could
have done more.’’ Beautiful!

Okay, I’ve written it down as number five.

Okay, now what’s the answer to that one? (long
silence)

What is it? What’s the distortion in that thought?
You’re a tricky bugger!
What is the answer?

246 David D. Burns, M.D.

HAL:
DAVID:
HAL:
DAVID:

HAL:
DAVID:
HAL:
DAVID:
HAL:
DAVID:

HAL:

DAVID:

HAL:

At least I did more than most people.
Right, and what percent do you believe that?
That I believe one hundred percent.

Great! Put it down in the Rational Response col-
umn. Now, let’s go back to this “I could have
done more.’’ Suppose you were Howard Hughes
sitting up in his tower, with all those millions
and billions. What could you say to yourself to
make yourself unhappy?

Well, I'm trying to think.

Just read what you wrote down on the paper.
Oh. ‘‘I could have done more.”’

You can always say that, can’t you?

Yeah.

And that’s why a lot of people who have won
fame and fortune are unhappy. It’s just an ex-
ample of perfectionistic standards. You can go
on and on and on, and no matter how much
achievement you experience, you can always
say, ‘‘I could have done more.’’ This is an ar-
bitrary way of punishing yourself. Do you agree
or not?

Well, yeah. I can see that. It takes more than
one element really to be happy. Because if it was
money, then every millionaire and billionaire
would be euphoric. But there are more circum-
stances that involve being happy or satisfied with
yourself than making money. That’s not the drive
that paralyzes me. I’ve never had a drive to go
after money.

What were your drives? Did you have a drive to
raise a family?

That was very important to me. Very important.
And I participated in the rearing of the children.

DAVID
HAL:

DAVID:

HAL:

DAVID:

HAL:

DAVID:

HAL:

DAVID:

HAL:

DAVID:

HAL:

FEELING GOOD 247

And what would you do in raising your children?

Well, I would work with them, teach them, play
with them.

And how did they come out?
I think they’re great!

Now, you were writing down, “‘I’m inadequate.
I’m a failure.’’ How can you reconcile this with
the fact that your aim was to raise three children
and you did it?

Again, I guess I wasn’t taking that into account.
So how can you call yourself a failure?

| have not functioned as a wage earner... as an
effective money-maker for several years.

Is it realistic to call yourself a ‘‘failure’’ based
on that? Here’s a man who has had a depression
for three years, and he finds it difficult to go to
work, and now it’s realistic to call him a failure?
People with depressions are failures?

Well, if | knew more of what caused depression,
I would be better able to make a value judgment.

Well, we’re not going to know the ultimate cause
of depression for some time yet. But our under-
standing is that the immediate cause of depres-
sion is punitive, hurtful statements that you hit
yourself with. Why this happens more to some
people than others we don’t know. The bio-
chemical and genetic influences have not yet
been worked out. Your upbringing undoubtedly
contributed, and we can deal with that in another
session if you like.

Since there is no final proof yet of the ultimate
cause of depression, can’t we think of that in
terms of a failure in itself? I mean, we don’t
know where it’s coming from... It must be

248 David D. Burns, M.D.

DAVID:
HAL:
DAVID:

HAL:
DAVID:

HAL:
DAVID:

something wrong with me that caused it. . . some
way that I have failed myself that causes the
depression.

What evidence do you have for that?

I don’t. It’s just a possibility.

Okay. But to make an assumption as punishing
as that. . . anything is a possibility. But there is
no evidence for that. When patients get over
depressions, then they become just as productive
as they ever were. Seems to me that if their
problem was that they were failures, when they
got over the depression they would still be fail-
ures. I’ve had college professors and corporate
presidents who have come to me. They were just
sitting and staring at the wall, but it was because
of their depression. When they got over the
depression, they started giving conferences and
managing their businesses like before. So how
can you possibly say that depression is due to
the fact that they are failures? Seems to me that
it’s more the other way around—that the failure
is due to the depression.

I can’t answer that.

It’s arbitrary to say that you’re a failure. You
have had a depression, and people with depres-
sion don’t do as much as when they are unde-
pressed.

Then I’m a successful depressive.

Right! Right! And part of being a successful de-
pressive means to get better. So I hope that’s
what we’re doing now. Imagine that you had
pneumonia for the past six months. You wouldn’t
have earned any dough. You could also say,
‘‘This makes me a failure.’’ Would that be re-
alistic?

HAL:

DAVID:

HAL:

DAVID:

HAL:

DAVID:

HAL:

DAVID:

HAL:

FEELING GOOD 249

I don’t see how I could claim that. Because |
certainly wouldn’t have willfully created the
pneumonia.

Okay, can you apply the same logic to your
depression?

Yeah, I can see it. I don’t honestly feel that my
depression was willfully induced either.

Of course it wasn’t. Did you want to bring this
on?

Oh boy, no!

Did you consciously do anything to bring it on?
Not that 1 know of.

And if we knew what was causing depression,
then we could put the finger someplace. Since
we don’t know, isn’t it silly to blame Hal for his
own depression? What we do know is that de-
pressed people get this negative view of them-
selves. And they feel and behave in accord with
this negative vision of everything. You didn’t
bring that on purposely or chvose to be incapa-
citated. And when you get over that vision and
when you have switched back to a nondepressed
way of looking at things, you are going to be
just as productive or more so than you’ve ever
been, if you’re typical of other patients that I’ve
worked with. You see what I mean?

Yeah, I can see.

It was a relief for Hal to realize that although he had been
financially unsuccessful for several years, it was nonsensical
to label himself as **a failure.’’ This negative self-image
and his sense of paralysis resulted from his all-or-nothing
thinking. His sense of worthlessness was based on his ten-
dency to focus only on the negatives in his life (the mental
filter) and to overlook the many areas where he had expe-

250 David D. Burns, M.D.

rienced success (discounting the positive). He was able to
see that he was aggravating himself unnecessarily by saying,
‘*T could have done more,’’ and he realized that financial
value is not the same as human worth. Finally, Hal was
able to admit that the symptoms he was experiencing—
lethargy and procrastination—were simply manifestations
of a temporary disease process and not indications of his
‘true self.’’ It was absurd for him to think his depression
was just punishment for some personal inadequacy, any
more than pneumonia would be.

At the end of the session, the Beck Depression Inventory
test indicated that Hal had experienced a 50 percent im-
provement. In the weeks that followed, he continued to help
himself, using the double-column technique. As he trained
himself to talk back to his upsetting thoughts, he was able
to reduce the distortions in his harsh way of evaluating
himself, and his mood continued to improve.

Hal left the real-estate business and opened a paperback
bookstore. He was able to break even; but in spite of con-
siderable personal effort, he was unable to show enough
profit to justify continuing beyond the first year’s trial pe-
riod. Thus, the marks of external success had not changed
appreciably during this time. In spite of this, Hal managed
to avoid significant depression and maintained his self-
esteem. The day he decided to ‘‘throw in the towel’’ on the
bookstore, he was still below the zero point financially, but
his self-respect did not suffer. He wrote the following brief
essay which he decided to read each morning while he was
looking for a new job:

Why Am | Not Worthless?

As long as I have something to contribute to the well-
being of myself and others, I am not worthless.
As long as what I do can have a positive effect, | am

not worthless.

FEELING GOOD 25!

As long as my being alive makes a difference to even
one person, I am not worthless (and this one person
can be me if necessary).

If giving love, understanding, companionship, en-
couragement, sociability, counsel, solace means
anything, I am not worthless.

If | can respect my opinions, my intelligence, I am not
worthless. If others also respect me, that is a bonus.

If I have self-respect and dignity, | am not worthless.

If helping to contribute to the livelihood of my em-
ployees’ families is a plus, [ am not worthless.

If I do my best to help my customers and vendors
through my productivity and creativity, I am not
worthless.

If my presence in this milieu does makes a difference
to others, | am not worthless.

I am not worthless. | am eminently worthwhile!

Loss of aLoved One. One of the most severely depressed
patients I treated early in my career was Kay, a thirty-one-
year-old pediatrician whose younger brother had committed
suicide in a grisly way outside her apartment six weeks
earlier. What was particularly painful for Kay was that she
held herself responsible for his suicide, and the arguments
she proposed in support of this point of view were quite
convincing. Kay felt she was confronted by an excruciating
problem that was entirely realistic and insoluble. She felt
that she too deserved to die and was actively suicidal at the
time of referral.

A frequent problem that plagues the family and friends
of an individual who successfully commits suicide is the
sense of guilt. There is a tendency to torture yourself with
such thoughts as, ‘‘Why didn’t I prevent this? Why was I
so stupid?’’ Even psychotherapists and counselors are not
immune to such reactions and may castigate themselves:
‘It’s really my fault. If only I had talked to him differently
in that last session. Why didn’t I pin him down on whether

252 David D. Burns, M.D.

or not he was suicidal? I should have intervened more
forcefully. I murdered him!’’ What adds to the tragedy and
irony is that in the vast majority of instances, the suicide
occurs because of the victim’s distorted belief that he has
some insoluble problem which, viewed from a more objec-
tive perspective, would seem much less overwhelming and
certainly not worth suicide.

Kay’s self-criticism was all the more intense because she
felt that she had gotten a better break in life than her
brother, and so she had gone out of her way to try to com-
pensate for this by providing emotional and financial sup-
port for him during his long bout with depression. She
arranged for his psychotherapy, helped pay for it, and even
got him an apartment near hers so that he could call her
whenever he was very down.

Her brother was a physiology student in Philadephia. On
the day of his suicide, he called Kay to ask about the effects
of carbon monoxide on the blood for a talk he was to give
in class. Because Kay is a blood specialist, she thought the
question was innocent and gave him the information with-
out thinking. She didn’t talk to him very long because she
was preparing a major lecture to deliver the following
morning at the hospital where she worked. He used her
information to make his fourth and final attempt outside her
apartment window while she was preparing her lecture. Kay
held herself responsible for his death.

She was understandably miserable, given the tragic sit-
uation she confronted. During the first few therapy sessions
she outlined why she blamed herself and why she was con-
vinced that she would be better off dead: ‘‘I had assumed
the responsibility for my brother’s life. I failed, so I feel I
am responsible for his death. It proves that I did not ade-
quately support him as I should have. I should have known
that he was in an acute situation, and I failed to intervene.
In retrospect, it’s obvious that he was getting suicidal again.
He’d had three prior serious suicide attempts. If I had just
asked him when he called me, I could have saved his life.

FEELING GOOD 253

[ was angry with him on many occasions during the month
before he died, and in all honesty he could be a burden and
a frustration at times. At one time | remember feeling an-
noyed and saying to myself that perhaps he wou/d be better
off dead. I feel terrible guilt for this. Maybe I wanted him
to die! I know that I let him down, and so I feel that I deserve
to die.”’

Kay was convinced that her guilt and agony were appro-
priate and valid. Being a highly moral person with a strict
Catholic upbringing, she felt that punishment and suffering
were expected of her. | knew there was something fishy
about her line of reasoning, but I couldn’t quite penetrate
her illogic for several sessions because she was bright and
persuasive and made a convincing case against herself. I
almost began to buy her belief that her emotional pain was
‘‘realistic.”’ Then, the key that | hoped might free her from
her mental prison suddenly dawned on me. The error she
was making was number ten discussed in Chapter 3—per-
sonalization.

At the fifth therapy session, I used this insight to challenge
the misconceptions in Kay’s point of view. First of all, |
emphasized that if she were responsible for her brother’s
death, she would have had to be the cause of it. Since the
cause of suicide is not known, even by experts, there was
no reason to conclude that she was the cause.

I told her that if we had to guess the cause of his suicide,
it would be his erroneous conviction that he was hopeless
and worthless and that his life was not worth living. Since
she did not control his thinking, she could not be responsible
for the illogical assumptions that caused him to end his life.
They were his errors, not hers. Thus, tn assuming respon-
sibility for his mood and actions, she was doing so for
something that was not within her domain of control. The
most that anyone could or would expect of her was to try
to be a helping agent, as she had been within the limits of
her ability.

I emphasized that it was unfortunate she did not have the

254 David D. Burns, M.D.

knowledge necessary to prevent his death. If it had dawned
on her that he was about to make a suicide attempt, she
would have intervened in whatever manner possible. How-
ever, since she did not have this knowledge, it was not
possible for her to intervene. Therefore, in blaming herself
for his death she was illogically assuming that she could
predict the future with absolute certainty, and that she had
all the knowledge in the universe at her disposal. Since both
these expectations were highly unrealistic, there was no
reason for her to despise herself. I pointed out that even
professional therapists are not infallible in their knowledge
of human nature, and are frequently fooled by suicidal pa-
tients in spite of their presumed expertise.

For all these reasons, it was a major error to hold herself
responsible for his behavior because she was not ultimately
in control of him. I emphasized that she was responsible
for her own life and well-being. At this point it dawned on
her that she was acting irresponsibly, not because she ‘‘let
him down’’ but because she was allowing herself to become
depressed and was contemplating her own suicide. The re-
sponsible thing to do was to refuse to feel any guilt and to
end the depression, and then to pursue a life of happiness
and satisfaction. This would be acting in a responsible man-
ner.

This discussion was followed by a rapid improvement in
her mood. Kay attributed this to a profound change in her
attitude. She realized we had exposed the misconceptions
that made her want to kill herself. She then elected to remain
in therapy for a period of time in order to work on enhancing
the quality of her own life, and to dispel the chronic sense
of oppression that had plagued her for many years prior to
her brother’s suicide.

Sadness Without Suffering. The question then arises,
What is the nature of ‘‘healthy sadness’’ when it is not at
all contaminated by distortion? Or to put it another way—
does sadness really need to involve suffering?

FEELING GOOD 255

While I cannot claim to know the definitive answer to
this question, | would like to share an experience which
occurred when I was an insecure medical student, and I was
on my clinical rounds on the urology service tn the hospital
at Stanford University Medical Center in California. I was
assigned to an elderly man who recently had had a tumor
successfully removed from his kidney. The staff anticipated
his rapid discharge from the hospital, but his liver function
suddenly began to deterioriate, and it was discovered that
the tumor had metastasized to his liver. This sad compli-
cation was untreatable, and his health began to fail rapidly
over several days. As his liver function worsened, he slowly
began to get groggier, slipping toward an unconscious state.
His wife, aware of the seriousness of the situation, came
and sat by his side night and day for over forty-eight hours.
When she was tired, her head would fall on his bed, but
she never left his side. At times she would stroke his head
and tell him, “‘You’re my man and [ love you.’’ Because
he was placed on the critical list, the members of his large
family, including children, grandchildren, and_ great-
grandchildren, began to arrive at the hospital from various
parts of California.

In the evening the resident in charge asked me to stay
with the patient and attend the case. As | entered the room,
I realized that he was slipping into a coma. There were eight
or ten relatives there, some of them very old and others
very young. Although they were vaguely aware of the se-
riousness of his condition, they had not been informed of
just how grave the imminent situation was. One of his sons,
sensing the old gentleman was nearing the end, asked me
if | would be willing to remove the catheter which was
draining his bladder. I realized the removal of the catheter
would indicate to the family that he was dying, so I went
to ask the nursing staff if this would be appropriate to do.
The nursing staff told me that it would because he was
indeed dying. After they showed me how to remove a cath-
eter, | went back to the patient and did this while the family

256 David D. Burns, M.D.

waited. Once I was done, they realized that a certain support
had been removed, and the son said, ‘“Thank you. I know
it was uncomfortable for him, and he would have appre-
ciated this.’’ Then the son turned to me as if to confirm the
meaning of the sign and asked, ‘‘Doctor, what is his con-
dition? What can we expect?’’

I felt a sudden surge of grief. | had felt close to this
gentle, courteous man because he reminded me of my own
grandfather, and I| realized that tears were running down my
cheeks. I had to make a decision either to stand there and
let the family see my tears as I spoke with them or to leave
and try to hide my feelings. I chose to stay and said with
considerable emotion, ‘‘He 1s a beautiful man. He can still
hear you, although he is nearly in a coma, and it is time to
be close to him and say good-bye to him tonight.’’ [ then
left the room and wept. The family members also cried and
sat on the bed, while they talked to him and said good-bye.
Within the next hour his coma deepened until he lost con-
sciousness and died.

Although his death was profoundly sad for the family and
for me, there was a tenderness and a beauty to the experience
that I will never forget. The sense of loss and the weeping
reminded me—‘**You can love. You can care.’’ This made
the grief an elevating experience that was entirely devoid
of pain or suffering for me. Since then, I have had a number
of experiences that brought me to tears in this same way.
For me the grief represents an elevation, an experience of
the highest magnitude.

Because | was a medical student, | was concerned that
my behavior might be seen as inappropriate by the staff.
The chairman of the department later took me aside and
informed me that the patient’s family had asked him to
extend their appreciation to me for being available to them
and for helping make the occasion of his passing intimate
and beautiful. He told me that he too had always felt strongly
toward this particular individual, and showed me a painting
of a horse the elderly man had done which was hanging on
his wall.

FEELING GOOD 257

The episode involved a letting go, a feeling of closure,
and a sense of good-bye. This was itn no way frightening
or terrible; but tn fact, it was peaceful and warm, and added
a sense of richness to my experience of life.


Part IV

Prevention and

Personal Growth


Chapter 10

The Cause of It All

When your depression has vanished, it’s a temptation to
enjoy yourself and relax. Certainly you’re entitled. Toward
the end of therapy, many patients tell me they feel the best
they’ve ever felt in their lives. It sometimes seems that the
more hopeless and severe and intractable the depression
seemed, the more extraordinary and delicious the taste of
happiness and self-esteem once it is over. As you begin to
feel better, your pessimistic thinking pattern will recede as
dramatically and predictably as the melting of winter’s snow
when spring arrives. You may even wonder how in the world
you came to believe such unrealistic thoughts in the first
place. This profound transformation of the human spirit
never ceases to amaze me. Over and over I have the op-
portunity to observe this magical metamorphosis in my daily
practice.

Because your change in outlook can be so dramatic, you
may feel convinced that your blues have vanished forever.
But there is an invisible residue of the mood disorder that
remains. If this is not corrected and eliminated, you will be
vulnerable to attacks of depression in the future.

There are several differences between feeling better and
getting better. Feeling better simply indicates that the painful
symptoms have temporarily disappeared. Getting better im-
plies:

261

262 David D. Burns, M.D.

1. Understanding why you got depressed.

2. Knowing why and how you got better. This involves
a mastery of the particular self-help techniques that
worked specifically for you so that you can reapply
them and make them work again whenever you
choose.

3. Acquiring self-confidence and self-esteem. Self-
confidence is based on the knowledge that you have
a good chance of being reasonably successful in per-
sonal relationships and in your career. Self-esteem is
the capacity to experience maximal self-love and joy
whether or not you are successful at any point in your
life.

4. Locating the deeper causes of your depression.

Parts I, II, and III of this book were designed to help you
achieve the first two goals. The next several chapters will
help you with the third and fourth goals.

Although your distorted negative thoughts will be sub-
stantially reduced or entirely eliminated after you have re-
covered from a bout of depression, there are certain ‘‘silent
assumptions’’ that probably still lurk in your mind. These
silent assumptions explain in large part why you became
depressed in the first place and can help you predict when
you might again be vulnerable. And they contain therefore
the key to relapse prevention.

Just what is a silent assumption? A silent assumption is
an equation with which you define your personal worth. It
represents your value system, your personal philosophy, the
stuff on which you base your self-esteem. Examples:
(1) “‘If someone criticizes me, I feel miserable because this
automatically means there is something wrong with me.”’
(2) **To be a truly fulfilled human being, I must be loved.
If | am alone, I am bound to be lonely and miserable.’’
(3) ‘“‘My worth as a human being is proportional to what
I’ve achieved.’’ (4) ‘‘If I don’t perform (or feel or act)
perfectly, I have failed.’’ As you will learn, these illogical

FEELING GOOD 263

assumptions can be utterly self-defeating. They create a
vulnerability that predisposes you to uncomfortable mood
swings. They represent your psychological Achilles’ heel.

In the next several chapters you will learn to identify and
evaluate your own silent assumptions. You might find that
an addiction to approval, love, achievement, or perfection
forms the basis of your mood swings. As you learn to expose
and challenge your own self-defeating belief system, you
will lay the foundation for a personal philosophy that ts
valid and self-enhancing. You will be on the road to joy
and emotional enlightenment.

In order to unearth the origins of your mood swings, most
psychiatrists, as well as the general public, assume that a
long and painfully slow (several years) therapeutic process
is necessary, after which most patients would find it difficult
to explain the cause of their depression. One of the greatest
contributions of cognitive therapy has been to circumvent
this.

In this chapter you will learn two different ways to iden-
tify silent assumptions. The first is a startlingly effective
method called the ‘‘vertical-arrow technique, ’’ which allows
you to probe your inner psyche.

The vertical-arrow technique is actually a spin-off of the
double-column method introduced in Chapter 4, in which
you learned how to write down your upsetting automatic
thoughts in the left-hand column and substitute more ob-
jective rational responses. This method helps you feel better
because you deprogram the distortions in your thinking pat-
terns. A brief example is shown in Figure !0—1. It was
written by Art, the psychiatric resident described in Chapter
7, who became upset after his supervisor tried to offer a
constructive criticism.

Putting the lie to his upsetting thoughts reduced Art’s
feelings of guilt and anxiety, but he wanted to know how
and why he made such an illogical interpretation in the first
place. Perhaps you’ ve also begun to ask yourself—is there
a pattern inherent in my negative thoughts? Is there some
psychic kink that exists on a deeper level of my mind?

264 David D. Burns, M.D.

Automatic Thoughts Rational Responses
1. Dr. B said the patient i. Mind reading; mental
found my comment ab- — filter; labeling.

rasive. He probably Just because Dr. B
thinks I’m a lousy ther- pointed out my error it |
apist. doesn’t follow he

thinks I’m a “‘lousy
therapist.”’ I'd have to
ask him to see what he
really thinks, but on
many occasions he has
praised me and said |
had outstanding talent.

Art used the vertical-arrow technique to answer these
questions. First, he drew a short downward arrow directly
beneath his automatic thought (see Figure 10-2, page 265).
This downward arrow is a form of shorthand which tells
Art to ask himself, ‘‘If this automatic thought were actually
true, what would it mean to me? Why would it be upsetting
to me?’’ Then Art wrote down the next automatic thought
that immediately came to mind. As you can see, he wrote,
‘If Dr. B. thinks I’m a lousy therapist, it would mean |
was a lousy therapist because Dr. B. is an expert.’’ Next
Art drew a second downward arrow beneath this thought
and repeated the same process so as to generate yet another
automatic thought, as shown in Figure 10—2. Every time he
came up with a new automatic thought, he immediately
drew a vertical arrow beneath it and asked himself, ‘‘If that
were true, why would it upset me?’’ As he did this over
and over, he was able to generate a chain of automatic
thoughts, which led to the silent assumptions that gave rise
to his problems. The downward-arrow method is analogous
to peeling successive layers of skin off an onion to expose

Figure 10—2. Exposing the silent assumption(s) that give rise
to your automatic thoughts with the use of the vertical-arrow meth-
od. The downward arrow is a form of shorthand for the following
questions: “If that thought were true, why would it upset me?
What would it mean to me?” The question represented by each
downward arrow in the example appears in quotation marks next
to the arrow. This is what you might ask yourself if you had written
down the automatic thought. This process leads to a chain of au-
tomatic thoughts that will reveal the root cause of the problem.

Automatic Thoughts Rational Responses

1. Dr. B. probably thinks —>
I’m a lousy therapist.
‘If he did think
this, why would
it be upsetting to
me?’’

2. That would mean I was —>
a lousy therapist because
he’s an expert.
| ‘Suppose I was
a lousy therapist,
what would this
mean to me?”’

3. That would mean | was —
a total failure. It would
mean I was no good.

{ ‘Suppose I was
no good. Why
would this be a
problem? What
would it mean to
me?’’

4. Then the word would —
spread and everyone
would find out what a
bad person I was. Then
no one would respect
me. I'd get drummed out
of the medical society,

266 David D. Burns, M.D.

Figure 10-2. cont.

Automatic Thoughts Rational Responses

and I’d have to move to
another state.
|  ‘‘And what
would that
mean?”’

5. It would mean [I was —
worthless. I’d feel so
miserable I’d want to
die.

the ones beneath. It is actually quite simple and straight-
forward, as you will see in Figure 10-2.

You will notice that the vertical-arrow technique is the
opposite of the usual strategy you use when recording your
automatic thoughts. Ordinarily you substitute a rational re-
sponse that shows why your automatic thought is distorted
and invalid (Figure 10-1). This helps you change your think-
ing patterns in the here and now so that you can think about
life more objectively and feel better. In the vertical-arrow
method you imagine instead that your distorted automatic
thought is absolutely valid, and you look for the grain of
truth in it. This enables you to penetrate the core of your
problems.

Now review Art’s chain of automatic thoughts in Figure
10-2 and ask yourself—what are the silent assumptions that
predispose him to anxiety, guilt, and depression? There are
several:

1. If someone criticizes me, they’re bound to be correct.
2. My worth is determined by my achievement.

3. One mistake and the whole is ruined. If I’m not suc-
cessful at all times, I’m a total zero.

4. Others won’t tolerate my imperfection. I have to be

FEELING GOOD 267

perfect to get people to respect and like me. When
I goof up, Pll encounter fierce disapproval and be
punished.

5. This disapproval will mean I am a bad, worthless
person.

Once you have generated your own chain of automatic
thoughts and clarified your silent assumptions, it is crucial
to pinpoint the distortions and substitute rational responses
as you usually do (see Figure 10-3, page 268).

The beauty of the downward-arrow method is that it is
inductive and Socratic: Through a process of thoughtful
questioning, you discover on your own the beliefs that defeat
you. You unearth the origin of your problems by repeating
the following questions over and over: “‘If that negative
thought were true, what would it mean to me? Why would
it upset me?’’ Without introducing some therapist’ s subjec-
tive bias or personal beliefs or theoretical leanings, you can
objectively and systematically go right to the root of your
problems. This circumvents a difficulty that has plagued the
history of psychiatry. Therapists from all schools of thought
have been notorious for interpreting patients’ experiences
in terms of preconceived notions that may have little or no
experimental validation. If you don’t ‘‘buy’’ your therapist’s
explanation of the origin of your problems, this is likely to
be interpreted as ‘“‘resistance’’ to the ‘‘truth.’’ In this subtle
way, your troubles get forced into your therapist’s mold
regardless of what you say. Imagine the bewildering array
of explanations for suffering that you would hear if you
went to a religious counselor (spiritual factors), a psychi-
atrist ina Communist country (the social-political-economic
environment), a Freudian analyst (internalized anger), a be-
havior therapist (a low rate of positive reinforcement), a
drug-oriented psychiatrist (genetic factors and_ brain-
chemistry imbalance), a family therapist (disturbed inter-
personal relationships), etc.!

A word of caution when you apply the vertical-arrow
method. You will short-circuit the process if you write down

Figure 10-3. After eliciting hischain of automaticthoughts, us-
ing the downward-arrow method, Artidentified the cognitive dis-
tortions and substituted more objective responses.

Automatic Thoughts Rational Responses
1. Dr. B. probably thinks 1. Just because Dr. B.
I’m a lousy therapist. - pointed out my error it
‘If he did think doesn’t follow he thinks
this, why would I'm a ‘‘lousy therapist.’’
it be upsetting to I’d have to ask him to see
me?’ what he really thinks,

but on many occasions
he has praised me and
said I had outstanding

talent.

2. That would mean I was 2. Anexpert can only point
a lousy therapist because —> out my specific strengths
he’s an expert. and weaknesses as a

‘‘Suppose I was therapist. Any time any-
a lousy therapist, one labels me_ as
what would this ‘*lousy’’ they are simply
mean to me?’’ making a global, de-

structive, useless state-
ment. I have had a lot of
success with most of my
patients, so it can’t be
true I’m ‘‘lousy’’ no
matter who says It.

3. That would mean I was 3. Overgeneralization.
a total failure. It would Even if I was relatively
mean I was no good. — unskilled and ineffective
‘Suppose I was as a therapist, it
no good. Why wouldn't mean I was ‘‘a
would this be a total failure’’ or ‘‘no
problem? What good.’’ [ have many
would it mean to other interests,
me?’’ Strengths, and desirable

qualities that aren’t re-
lated to my career.

4. Then the word would 4. This is absurd. If | made
spread and everyone a mistake, I can correct

FEELING GOOD 269

Figure 10-3. cont.

Automatic Thoughts Rational Responses

would find out what a it. ““The word’’ isn’t
bad person I was. Then going to spread around
no one would respect the state like wildfire just
me. I’d get drummed out — ___ because I made an error!
of the medical society, What are they going to
and I’d have to move to do, publish a headline in
another state. the newspaper: ‘‘NOTED
,  ‘‘And what PSYCHIATRIST MAKES
would that MISTAKE’?
mean?’’

. It would mean I was . Even if everyone in the
worthless. I’d feel so world disapproves of me
miserable I’d want to or criticizes me, it can’t
die. make me worthless be- |

cause I[’m not worthless.
If ’'m not worthless, I
must be quite worth-
while. So, what is there to
feel miserable about?

thoughts that contain descriptions of your emotional reac-
tions. Instead, write down the negative thoughts that cause
your emotional reactions. Here’s an example of the wrong
way to do it:

First Automatic Thought: My boyfriend didn’t call me this
weekend as he promised he would.
‘‘Why is that upsetting to me? What
does it mean to me?”’
Second Automatic Thought: Oh, it’s awful and terrible be-
cause I can’t stand it.

This is useless. We already know you feel awful and
terrible. The question is—what thoughts automatically
crossed your mind that caused you to feel so upset? What
would it mean to you if he had neglected you?

Here’s the correct way to do it:

2/0 David D. Burns, M.D.

1.

My boyfriend didn’t call me this weekend as he promised
he would.
J ‘Why would that be upsetting
to me? What does it mean to
me?’’

. That means he’s neglecting me. That means he really

doesn’t love me.
J ‘‘And suppose that were true.
What would that mean to
me?’’
That would mean there’s something wrong with me.
Otherwise he’d be more attentive.
J ‘‘And suppose that were true.
What would that mean to
me?’’

. That would mean I was going to be rejected.

‘And if I were in fact rejected,
what then? What would that
mean to me?’’

. That would mean I was unlovable and I would always

be rejected.
J ‘And if that happened, why
would it upset me?’’
That would mean I’d end up alone and miserable.

Thus, by pursuing the meaning rather than your feelings,

your silent assumptions became obvious: (1) If I’m not loved
I’m not worthwhile; and (2) I’m bound to be miserable tf
I’m alone.

This is not to say your feelings aren’t important. The

whole point ts to deliver the real McCoy—valid emotional
transformation.

The Dysfunctional Attitude Scale (DAS). Because of the

crucial importance of eliciting the silent assumptions that
give rise to your mood swings, a second, simpler method
for eliciting them called the **‘Dysfunctional Attitude Scale”’

FEELING GOOD 271

(DAS) has been developed by a member of our group, Dr.
Arlene Weissman. She has compiled a list of one hundred
self-defeating attitudes that commonly occur in individuals
predisposed to emotional disorders. Her research has indi-
cated that while negative automatic thoughts are reduced
dramatically between episodes of depression, a self-
defeating belief system remains more or less constant during
episodes of depression and remission. Dr. Weissman’s stud-
ies confirm the concept that your silent assumptions rep-
resent a predisposition to emotional turbulence that you
carry with you at all times.

Although a complete presentation of the lengthy Dys-
functional Attitude Scale would be beyond the scope of this
book, I have selected a number of the more common atti-
tudes and have added several others which will be useful.
As you fill out the questionnaire, indicate how much you
agree or disagree with each attitude. When you are finished,
an answer key will let you score your answers and generate
a profile of your personal value systems. This will show
your areas of psychological strength and vulnerability.

Answering the test is quite simple. After each of the
thirty-five attitudes, put a check in the column that represents
your estimate of how you think most of the time. Be sure
to choose only one answer for each attitude. Because we
are all different, there is no ‘‘right’’ or ‘‘wrong’’ answer to
any statement. To decide whether a given attitude is typical
of your own philosophy, recall how you look at things most
of the time.

2/2 David D. Burns, M.D.

EXAMPLE:

35. People who
have the
marks of
success
(good looks,
social sta-
tus, wealth,
or fame) are
bound to be
happier than
those who
do not.

In this example the checkmark in the Agree Slightly
column indicates that the statement is somewhat typical
of the attitudes of the person completing the inventory.
Now go ahead.

The Dysfunctional Attitude Scale*

1. Criticism
will ob-
viously up-
set the

person who

receives the

Criticism.

*Copyright 1978, Arlene Weissman.

. It is best to

give up my
own inter-
ests in order
to please
other peo-

ple.

. IT need other

people’s ap-
proval in
order to be

happy.

. If someone
important to
me expects
me to do
something,
then I really
should do
it.

. My value as
a person de-
pends
greatly on
what others
think of me.

. | cannot

find happi-
ness without
being loved
by another
person.

FEELING GOOD 273


274 David D. Burns, M.D.

. If others

dislike you,
you are

bound to be
less happy.

. If people

whom I care
about reject
me, it
means there
is something
wrong with
me.

. If a person I

love does
not love
me, it
means | am
unlovable.

. Being iso-

lated from
others 1s
bound to
lead to un-
happiness.

. [If lam to

be a worth-
while per-
son, | must
be truly out-
standing in
at least one
major re-
spect.


. | must be a

useful, pro-
ductive,
creative per-
son or life
has no pur-
pose.

. People who

have good
ideas are
more wor-
thy than
those who
do not.

. If Ido not

do as well
as other
people, it
means I am
inferior.

. If I fail at

my work,
then | am a
failure as a
person.

. If you can-

not do
something
well, there
is little
point in
doing it at
all.

FEELING GOOD 275

Agree

Slightly

276 David D. Burns, M.D.

17. It is shame-
ful for a
person to
display his
weaknesses.

18. A person
should try
to be the
best at
everything
he under-
takes.

19. I should be
upset if I
make a mis-
take.

20. If I don’t
set the high-
est stan-
dards for
myself, |
am likely to
end up a
second-rate
person.

21. If I strongly
believe I
deserve
something, |
have reason
to expect
that I should
get it.

22.

23.

24.

25.

It is neces-
sary to be-
come
frustrated if
you find ob-
stacles to
getting what
you want.

If I put
other peo-
ple’s needs
before my
own, they
should help
me when |
need some-
thing from
them.

If lama
good hus-
band (or
wife), then
my spouse
is bound to
love me.

If I do nice
things for
someone, |
can antici-
pate that
they will re-
spect me
and treat me
just as well
as I treat
them.

FEELING GOOD 277


278 David D. Burns, M.D.

26. I should as-

27.

28.

sume re-
sponsibility
for how
people feel
and behave
if they are
close to me.

If I criticize
the way
someone
does some-
thing and
they become
angry or de-
pressed, this
means I
have upset
them.

To be a
good,
worthwhile,
moral per-
son, I must
try to help
everyone
who needs
It.

Disagree
Very
Much

29.

30.

31.

32.

If a child ts
having emo-
tional or be-
havioral
difficulties,
this shows
that the
child’s par-
ents have
failed in
some 1m-
portant re-

spect.

I should be
able to
please
everybody.

I cannot ex-
pect to con-
trol how I
feel when
something
bad hap-

pens.

There is no
point in
trying to
change up-
setting emo-
tions
because
they are a
valid and
inevitable
part of daily
living.

FEELING GOOD 279


280 David D. Burns, M.D.

33.

34.

35.

My moods
are primar-
ily created
by factors
that are
largely be-
yond my
control,
such as the
past, or
body chem-
istry, Or
hormone
cycles, or
biorhythms,
or chance,
or fate.

My happi-
ness 1S
largely de-
pendent on
what hap-
pens to me.

People who
have the
marks of
SUCCESS
(good looks,
social sta-
tus, wealth,
or fame) are
bound to be
happier than
those who
do not.


FEELING GOOD 28!

Now that you have completed the DAS, you can score it
in the following way. Score your answer to each of the
thirty-five attitudes according to this key:

Agree Agree Disagree Disagree
Strongly Slightly Neutral Slightly Very Much
—2 — | 0 + | +2

Now add up your score on the first five attitudes. These
measure your tendency to measure your worth in terms of
the opinions of others and the amount of approval or crit-
icism you receive. Suppose your scores on these five items
were +2; +1; —1; +2; 0. Then your total score for these
five questions would be +4.

Proceed in this way to add up your score for items |
through 5, 6 through 10, 11 through 15, 16 through 20, 21
through 25, 26 through 30, and 31 through 35, and record
these as illustrated in the following example:

SCORING EXAMPLE:

Individual Total
Value System Attitudes Scores Scores
I. Approval | through 5 +2, +1, +4

—1, +2, 0
Il. Love 6 through 10 | —2, —1, —7

—-2, -2,0

+ |

+7

Ii]. Achievement | 11 through 15 , +1, 0,
0, -2

IV. Perfectionism | 16 through 20

+2, +2,
+1.+1.41


282 David D. Burns, M.D.
SCORING EXAMPLE continued:

Individual

Value System Altitudes Scores

V. Entitlement 21 through 25 | +1, +1,
~1I, +1,0
VI. Omnipotence | 26 through 30 | —2, —1, 0,

—1, +1

VII. Autonomy 31 through 35 | —2, —2,

-1,-2,-2]

Total
Scores

RECORD YOUR ACTUAL SCORES HERE:

Value System Attitudes Scores
ee
ce ce
oro

. Po

. oe

Total
Scores

31 through 35

VII. Autonomy


FEELING GOOD 283

Each cluster of five items from the scale measures one
of seven value systems. Your total score for each cluster of
five items can range from +10 to —10. Now plot your
total scores on each of the seven variables so as to develop
your ‘‘personal-philosophy profile’’ as follows:

SCORING EXAMPLE:

we & RS & ee PS
ge cS se SS So
EF KF SM KF KF Hw
_ +10
G
RS:
Be +8
SP +6 a
oS
ae +4
h
+ 2)
h
) r\ / \
/ \:
—- 2
o -4 |
GS
oO
es - 8 N
ui >

|
+

I. iF tt. IV. V. Vi. OVI.

284 David D. Burns, M.D.

As you can see, a positive score represents an area where
you are psychologically strong. A negative score represents
an area where you’re emotionally vulnerable.

This individual has strengths in the areas of approval,
perfectionism, and entitlement. His vulnerabilities lie in the
areas of love, omnipotence, and autonomy. The meanings
of these concepts will be described. First, plot your own
personal-philosophy profile here.

X & @
\ i) ww G
» rss S & oe +)
S 2 a & x Q eS
g mY ~~ SS S s
SSO oS @ SS
+10
|
= + 8
2s .
= 20 + 6
2 6
as
an + 4
+ 2
QO
— 2
& — 4
Se _
oe
Es — 8
LL] >
—10

I. II. Hit. IV. V. VI. VEE.

FEELING GOOD 285
interpreting Your DAS Scores

| Approval. The first five attitudes on the DAS test
probe your tendency to measure your self-esteem based on
how people react to you and what they think of you. A
positive score between zero and ten indicates you are in-
dependent, with a healthy sense of your own worth even
when confronted with criticism and disapproval. A negative
score between zero and minus ten indicates you are exces-
sively dependent because you evaluate yourself through
other people’s eyes. If someone insults you or puts you
down, you automatically tend to look down on yourself.
Since your emotional well-being is exquisitely sensitive to
what you imagine people think of you, you can be easily
manipulated, and you are vulnerable to anxiety and depres-
sion when others criticize you or are angry with you.

Il. Love. The second five attitudes on the test assess your
tendency to base your worth on whether or not you are
loved. A positive score indicates you see love as desirable,
but you have a wide range of other interests you also find
gratifying and fulfulling. Hence, love is not a requirement
for your happiness or self-esteem. People are likely to find
you attractive because you radiate a healthy sense of self-
love and are interested in many aspects of living.

A negative score indicates you are a ‘“‘love junkie.’’ You
see love as a ‘“‘need’’ without which you cannot survive,
much less be happy. The closer your score is to minus ten,
the more dependent on love you are. You tend to adopt
inferior, put-down roles in relationships with people you
care about for fear of alienating them. The result of this,
more often than not, is that they lose respect for you and
consider you a burden because of your attitude that without
their love you would collapse. As you sense that people
drift away from you, you become gripped by a painful,
terrifying withdrawal syndrome. You realize you may not
be able to ‘shoot up’’ with your daily dose of affection and
attention. You then become consumed by the driving com-

286 David D. Burns, M.D.

pulsion to “‘get love.’’ Like most junkies, you may even
resort to coercive, manipulative behavior to get your
‘stuff.’ Ironically, your needy, greedy love addiction
drives many people away, thus intensifying your loneliness.

Ill. Achievement. Your score on attitudes 11 through 15
will help you measure a different type of addiction. A neg-
ative score indicates you are a workaholic. You have a
constricted sense of your own humanity, and you see your-
self as a commodity in the marketplace. The more negative
your score, the more your sense of self-worth and your
capacity for joy are dependent on your productivity. If you
go on vacation, if your business slumps, tf you retire or
become ill and inactive, you will be in danger of an emo-
tional crash. Economic and emotional depressions will seem
identical to you. A positive score, in contrast, indicates that
you enjoy creativity and productivity, but do not see them
as an exclusive or necessary road to self-esteem and satis-
faction.

IV. Perfectionism. Items 16 through 20 measure your
tendency to perfectionism. A negative score indicates you
are hooked on searching for the Holy Grail. You demand
perfection in yourself—mistakes are taboo, failure is worse
than death, and even negative emotions are a disaster.
You’re supposed to look, feel, think, and behave superbly
at all times. You sense that being less than spectacular means
burning in the flames of hell. Although you drive yourself
at an intense pace, your satisfactions are meager. Once you
do achieve a goal, another more distant goal instantly re-
places it, so you never experience the reward of getting to
the top of the mountain. Eventually you begin to wonder
why the promised payoff from all your effort never seems
to materialize. Your life becomes a joyless, tedious tread-
mill. You are living with unrealistic, impossible personal
standards, and you need to reevaluate them. Your problem
does not lie in your performance, but in the yardstick you
use to measure it. If you bring your expectations in line

FEELING GOOD 287

with reality, you will be regularly pleased and rewarded
instead of frustrated.

A positive score suggests you have the capacity to set
meaningful, flexible, appropriate standards. You get great
Satisfaction from processes and experiences, and you are
not exclusively fixated on outcomes. You don’t have to be
outstanding at everything, and you don’t always have to
‘‘try your best.’” You don’t fear mistakes, but you see them
as golden opportunities to learn and to endorse your hu-
manity. Paradoxically, you are likely to be much more pro-
ductive than your perfectionistic associates because you do
not become compulsively preoccupied with detail and cor-
rectness. Your life 1s like a flowing river or a geyser com-
pared with your rigid perfectionistic friends who appear
more like icy glaciers.

V. Entitlement. Attitudes 21 through 25 measure your
sense of ‘‘entitlement.’” A negative score indicates that you
feel “‘entitled’’ to things—success, love, happiness, etc.
You expect and demand that your wants be met by other
people and by the universe at large because of your inherent
goodness or hard work. When this does not happen—as is
often the case—you are locked into one of two reactions.
Either you feel depressed and inadequate or you become
irate. Thus, you consume enormous amounts of energy
being frustrated, sad, and mad. Much of the time you see
life as a sour, rotten experience. You complain loudly and
often, but you do little to solve problems. After all, you’re
entitled to have them solved, so why should you have to
put out any effort? As a result of your bitter, demanding
attitudes, you invariably get far Jess of what you want from
life.

A positive score suggests you don’t feel automatically
entitled to things, so you negotiate for what you want and
often get it. Because of your awareness that other people
are unique and different, you realize there is no inherent
reason why things should always go your way. You ex-
perience a negative outcome as a disappointment but not a

288 David D. Burns, M.D.

tragedy because you are a percentage player, and you don’t
expect perfect reciprocity or ““justice’’ at all times. You are
patient and persistent, and you have a high frustration tol-
erance. As a result, you often end up ahead of the pack.

Vi. Omnipotence. Attitudes 26 through 30 measure
your tendency to see yourself as the center of your personal
universe and to hold yourself responsible for much of what
goes on around you. A negative score indicates you often
make the personalization error discussed in Chapters 3 and
6. You blame yourself inappropriately for the negative ac-
tions and attitudes of others who are not really under your
control. Consequently, you are plagued by guilt and self-
condemnation. Paradoxically, the attitude that you should
be omnipotent and all-powerful cripples you and leaves you
anxious and ineffectual.

A positive score, in contrast, indicates you know the joy
that comes from accepting that you are not the center of the
universe. Since you are not in control of other adults, you
are not ultimately responsible for them but only for yourself.
This attitude does not isolate you from others. Quite the
opposite is true. You relate to people effectively as a friendly
collaborator, and you are not threatened when they disagree
with your ideas or fail to follow your advice. Because your
attitude gives people a sense of freedom and dignity, you
paradoxically become a human magnet. Others often want
to be close to you because you have relinquished any attempt
to control them. People frequently listen to and respect your
ideas because you do not polarize them with an angry in-
sistence they must agree with you. As you give up your
drive for power, people repay you by making you a person
of influence. Your relationships with your children and
friends and associates are characterized by mutuality instead
of dependency. Because you don’t try to dominate people,
they admire, love, and respect you.

Vil. Autonomy. Items 31 through 35 measure your au-
tonomy. This refers to your ability to find happiness within

FEELING GOOD 289

yourself. A positive score indicates that all your moods are
ultimately the children of your thoughts and attitudes. You
assume responsibility for your feelings because you rec-
ognize they are ultimately created by you. This sounds as
if you might be lonely and isolated because you realize that
all meaning and feelings are created only in your head.
Paradoxically, however, this vision of autonomy frees you
from the petty confines of your mind and delivers the world
to you with a full measure of all the satisfaction, mystery,
and excitement that it can offer.

A negative score suggests you are still trapped in the
belief that your potential for joy and self-esteem comes from
the outside. This puts you at a great disadvantage because
everything outside is ultimately beyond your control. Your
moods end up the victim of external factors. Do you want
this? If not, you can eventually free yourself from this at-
titude as surely as a snake sheds tts skin, but you will have
to work at it with the various methods outlined in this book.
When it’s finally your turn to experience the transformation
to autonomy and personal responsibility, you will be
amazed—or awestruck—or pleased—or delightfully over-
whelmed. It’s well worth a major personal commitment.

In the following chapters a number of these attitudes and
value systems will be examined in detail. As you study each
one, ask yourself: (1) Is it to my advantage to maintain this
particular belief? (2) Is this belief really true and valid?
(3) What specific steps can I take that will allow me to rid
myself of attitudes that are self-defeating and unrealistic,
and substitute others that are more objective and more self-
enhancing?

Chapter 11

The Approval Addiction

Let’s consider your belief that it would be terrible if some-
one disapproved of you. Why does disapproval pose such
a threat? Perhaps your reasoning goes like this: ‘‘If one
person disapproves of me, it means that everyone would
disapprove of me. It would mean there was something wrong
with me.”’

If these thoughts apply to you, your moods will shoot up
every time you are being stroked. You reason, ‘‘I got some
positive feedback so I can feel good about myself.”’

Why is this illogical? Because you are overlooking the
fact that it is only your thoughts and beliefs which have the
power to elevate your spirits. Another person’s approval
has no ability to affect your mood unless you believe what
he or she says is valid. But if you believe the compliment
is earned, tt is your belief which makes you feel good. You
must validate external approval before you experience mood
elevation. This validation represents your personal self-
approval.

Suppose you were visiting the psychiatric ward of a hos-
pital. A confused, hallucinating patient approaches you and
says, ‘“‘You are wonderful. I had a vision from God. He
told me the thirteenth person to walk through the door would
be the Special Messenger. You are the thirteenth, so I know

290

FEELING GOOD 291

you are God’s Chosen One, the Prince of Peace, the Holy
of Holies. Let me kiss your shoe.’’ Would this extreme
approval elevate your mood? You’d probably feel nervous
and uncomfortable. That’s because you don’t believe what
the patient is saying is valid. You discredit the comments.
It is Only your beliefs about yourself that can affect the
way you feel. Others can say or think whatever they want
about you, good or bad, but only your thoughts will influ-
ence your emotions.

The price you pay for your addiction to praise will be an
extreme vulnerability to the opinions of others. Like any
addict, you will find you must continue to feed your habit
with approval in order to avoid withdrawal pangs. The mo-
ment someone who is important to you expresses disap-
proval, you will crash painfully, just like the junkie who
can no longer get his ‘‘stuff.’’ Others will be able to use
this vulnerability to manipulate you. You will have to give
in to their demands more often than you want to because
you fear they might reject or look down on you. You set
yourself up for emotional blackmail.

You may come to see that your addiction to approval is
not to your advantage, but still believe that other people
really do have the right to judge not only the merit of what
you do and say but also your worth as a human being.
Imagine that you made a second visit to the psychiatric
hospital ward. This time a different hallucinating patient
approaches you and says, ‘‘You’re wearing a red shirt. This
shows you are the Devil! You are evil!’’ Would you feel
bad because of this criticism and disapproval? Of course
not. Why would these disapproving words not upset you?
It’s simple—because you don’t believe the statements are
true. You must “‘buy into’’ the other person’s criticism—
and believe that you are in fact no good—in order to feel
bad about yourself.

Did it ever occur to you that if someone disapproves of
you, it might be his or her problem? Disapproval often
reflects other people’s irrational beliefs. To take an extreme

292 + David D. Burns, M.D.

example, Hitler’s hateful doctrine that Jews were inferior
did not reflect anything about the inner worth of the people
he intended to destroy.

There will, of course, be many occasions when disap-
proval will result from an actual error on your part. Does
it follow that you are a worthless, no-good person? Ob-
viously not. The other person’s negative reaction can only
be directed toward a specific thing you did, not at your
worth. A human being cannot do wrong things all the time!

Let’s look at the other side of the coin. Many well-known
criminals have had bands of fervent admirers regardless of
how repulsive and abhorrent their crimes. Consider Charles
Manson. He promoted sadism and murder, yet was regarded
as a messiah by his numerous followers, who seemed to do
whatever he suggested. [| want to make it abundantly clear
that I am not advocating atrocious behavior, nor am [ an
admirer of Charles Manson. But ask yourself these ques-
tions: If Charles Manson did not end up totally rejected for
what he did or said, what have you ever done that was so
terrible that you will be rejected by everyone? And do you
still believe in the equation: approval = worth? After all,
Charles Manson enjoyed the intense adulation of his “‘fam-
ily.’’ Did the approval he received make him an especially
worthy person? This is obvious nonsense.

It’s a fact that approval feels good. There’s nothing wrong
with that; it’s natural and healthy. It 1s also a fact that
disapproval and rejection usually taste bitter and unpleasant.
This is human and understandable. But you are swimming
in deep, turbulent waters if you continue to believe that
approval and disapproval are the proper and ultimate yard-
sticks with which to measure your worth.

Did you ever criticize someone? Did you ever disagree
with a friend’s opinion? Did you ever scold a child because
of his or her behavior? Did you ever snap at a loved one
when you were feeling irritable? Did you ever choose not
to associate with someone whose behavior was distasteful
to you? Then ask yourself—when you disagreed, or criti-
cized, or disapproved—were you making the ultimate moral

FEELING GOOD 293

judgment that the other person was a totally worthless, no-
good human being? Do you have the power to make such
sweeping judgments about other people? Or were you sim-
ply expressing the fact that you held a different point of
view and were upset with what the other person did or said?

For example, in the heat of anger you may have blurted
out to your spouse, *“You’re no damn good!’’ But when
the flame cools down a day or two later, didn’t you admit
to yourself that you were exaggerating the extent of his or
her ‘‘badness’’? Sure, your loved one may have many faults,
but isn’t it absurd to think your outburst of disapproval or
criticism makes him or her totally and forever worthless?
If you admit your disapproval does not contain enough moral
atomic power to devastate the meaning and value of another
person’s life, why give their disapproval the power to wipe
out your sense of self-worth? What makes them so special?
When you tremble tn terror because someone dislikes you,
you magnify the wisdom and knowledge that person pos-
sesses, and you have simultaneously sold yourself short as
being unable to make sound judgments about yourself. Of
course, someone might point out a flaw in your behavior
or an error in your thinking. I hope they will because you
can learn this way. After all, we’re all imperfect, and others
have the right to tell us about it from time to time. But are
you obliged to make yourself miserable and hate yourself
every time someone flies off the handle or puts you down?

The Origin of the Problem. Where did you get this ap-
proval addiction tn the first place? We can only speculate
that the answer may lie in your interactions with people
who were important to you when you were a child. You
may have had a parent who was unduly critical when you
misbehaved, or who was irritable even at times when
you weren't doing anything particularly wrong. Your
mother may have snapped, ‘‘You’re bad for doing that!’
or your father may have blurted out, ‘‘You’re always goof-
ing up. You'll never learn.”’

As a small child you probably saw your parents as gods.

294 David D. Burns, M.D.

They taught you how to speak and tie your shoes, and most
of what they told you was valid. If Daddy said, **You will
be killed if you walk out into traffic,’’ this was literally
true. Like most children, you might have assumed that
nearly everything your parents said was true. So when you
heard ‘‘You’re no good’’ and ‘**You’ll never learn,’’ you
literally believed it and this hurt badly. You were too young
to be able to reason, **Daddy is exaggerating and overgen-
eralizing.’’ And you didn’t have the emotional maturity
to see that Daddy was irritable and tired that day, or per-
haps had been drinking and wanted to be left alone. You
couldn’t determine whether his outburst was his problem or
yours. And if you were old enough to suggest he was being
unreasonable, your attempts to put things into a sane per-
spective may have been rapidly deprogrammed and dis-
couraged with a swift smack on the behind.

No wonder you developed the bad habit of automatically
looking down on yourself every time someone disapproved
of you. It wasn’t your fault that you picked up this tendency
as a child, and you can’t be blamed for growing up with
this blind spot. But it is your responsibility as an adult to
think the issue through realistically, and to take specific
steps to outgrow this particular vulnerability.

Just how does this fear of disapproval predispose you to
anxiety and depression? John is an unmarried, soft-spoken
fifty-two-year-old architect who lives in fear of criticism.
He was referred for treatment because of a severe recurring
depression, which had not diminished in spite of several
years of therapy. One day when he was feeling particularly
good about himself, he approached his boss enthusiastically
with some new ideas about an important project. The boss
snapped, ‘‘Later, John. Can’t you see I’m busy!’ John’s
self-esteem collapsed instantly. He dragged himself back to
his office, drowning in despair and self-hatred, telling him-
self he was no good. ‘‘How could I have been so thought-
less?’” he asked himself.

As John shared this episode with me, I asked him the
simple and obvious questions, “‘Who was the one who was

FEELING GOOD 295

acting goofy——you or your boss? Were you actually behav-
ing in an inappropriate manner, or was your boss acting
irritable and unpleasant?’’ After a moment’s reflection, he
was able to identify the true culprit. The possibility that the
boss was acting obnoxiously had not occurred to him be-
cause of his automatic habit of blaming himself. He felt
relief when he suddenly realized he had absolutely nothing
to be ashamed of in how he had acted. His boss, who was
aloof, was probably under pressure himself and off the mark
that day.

John then raised the question, ‘“‘Why am I always strug-
gling so hard for approval? Why do I fall apart like this?”’
He then remembered an event that occurred when he was
twelve. His only sibling, a younger brother, had tragically
died after a long bout with leukemia. After the funeral he
overheard his mother and grandmother talking in the bed-
room. His mother was weeping bitterly and said, ‘‘Now
I’ve got nothing to live for.’” His grandmother responded,
‘*Shush. Johnny ts just down the hall! He might hear you!”’

As John shared this with me, he began to weep. He had
heard these comments, and they meant to him, ‘‘This proves
lin not worth much. My brother was the important one.
My mother doesn’t really love me.’’ He never let on that
he had been listening, and through the years he tried to push
the memory out of his mind by telling himself, “‘It really
isn’t important whether or not she loves me anyway.’’ But
he struggled intensely to please his mother with his achieve-
ments and his career in a desperate bid to win her approval.
In his heart he didn’t believe he had any true worth, and
perceived himself as inferior and unlovable. He tried to
compensate for his missing self-esteem by earning other
people’s admiration and approval. His life was like a con-
stant effort to inflate a balloon with a hole in it.

After recalling this incident, John was able to see the
irrationality of his reaction to the comments he had over-
heard in the hall. His mother’s bitterness, and the emptiness
she felt, were a natural part of the grieving process that any
parent goes through when a child dies. Her comments had

296 David D. Burns, M.D.

nothing to do with John, but only with her temporary depres-
sion and despair.

Putting this memory into a new perspective helped John
see how illogical and self-defeating it was to link his worth
to the opinions of others. Perhaps you too are beginning to
see that your belief in the importance of external approval
is highly unrealistic. Ultimately you, and only you, can
make yourself consistently happy. No one else can. Now,
let’s review some simple steps that you can take to put these
principles into practice so you can transform your desire for
self-esteem and self-respect into an emotional reality.

The Path to Independence and Self-Respect

Cost-Benefit Analysis. The first step in overcoming your
belief in any of the self-defeating assumptions from the DAS
test is to perform a cost-benefit analysis. Ask yourself, what
are the advantages and disadvantages of telling myself that
disapproval makes me less worthwhile? After listing all the
ways this attitude hurts you and helps you, you will be in
a position to make an enlightened decision to develop a
healthier value system. .

For example, a thirty-three-year-old marned woman
named Susan found she was overly involved with church
and community activities because she was a responsible and
capable worker and was frequently selected for various com-
mittees. She felt enormously pleased every time she was
chosen for a new job and she feared saying no to any request
because that would mean risking someone’s disapproval.
Because she was terrified about letting people down, she
became more and more addicted to the cycle of giving up
her own interests and desires in order to please others.

The DAS test and the ‘‘Vertical Arrow Technique’’ de-
scribed tn the previous chapter revealed one of her silent
assumptions to be: “*I must always do what people expect
me to do.’’ She seemed reluctant to give up this belief, so
she performed a cost-benefit analysis (Figure 11-1). Be-

Figure 11-1. The Cost-Benefit Method for Evaluating “Silent
Assumptions.” ASSUMPTION: “I must always do what people
expect me to do.”

Advantages
of Believing This

Disadvantages of
Believing This

N

(ad

>

A

. If P’'m able to meet peo-

ple’s expectations, I can
feel I’m in control. This
feels good.

. When [ please people |

will feel secure and safe.

. IT can avoid a lot of guilt

and confusion. I don’t
have to think things out,
since all I have to do is
what others want me to.

. 1 don’t have to worry

about people being upset
with me or looking down
on me.

. IT can avoid conflict and |

don’t have to be assertive
and speak up for myself.

|. I sometimes compromise and end up

doing things that are not in my best
interest that I don’t really want to do.

. This assumption keeps me from test-

ing relationships—I never know if !
could be accepted just for me. Thus,
I always have to earn love and the
right to be close to people by doing
what people want me to do. I become
like a slave.

. It gives people too much power over

me—they can coerce me with the
threat of disapproval.

. It makes it hard for me to know what

I really want. I’m not used to setting
priorities for myself and making in-
dependent decisions.

. When people do disapprove of me,

as is inevitable at times, then [ con-
clude I’ve done something to dis-
please them, and I experience severe
guilt and depression. This puts my
moods under the control of other peo-
ple instead of myself.

. What other people want me to do

may not always be what’s best for
me, since they often have their own
interests at heart. Their expectations
for me may not always be realistic
and valid.

. Lend up seeing other people as so

weak and fragile that they are de-
pendent on me and would be hurt and
miserable if I let them down.

298 David D. Burns, M.D.

Figure 11-1. cont.

Advantages Disadvantages of
of Believing This Believing This

8. Because I fear taking risks and hav-
ing someone upset with me, my life
becomes static. | don’t feel moti-
vated to change, to grow or to do
things differently so as to enhance
my range of experiences.

cause the disadvantages of her approval addiction greatly
outweighed the advantages, she became much more open
to changing her personal philosophy. Try this simple tech-
nique with regard to one of your self-defeating assumptions
about disapproval. It can be an important first step to per-
sonal growth.

Rewrite the Assumption. If, based on your cost-benefit
analysis, you see that your fear of disapproval hurts you
more than it helps, the second step is to rewrite your silent
assumption so that it becomes more realistic and more self-
enhancing (you can do this with any of the 35 attitudes on
the DAS test that represent areas of psychological vulner-
ability for you). In the above example, Susan decided to
revise her belief as follows: ‘‘It can be enjoyable to have
someone approve of me, but | don’t need approval in order
to be a worthwhile person or to respect myself. Disapproval
can be uncomfortable, but it doesn’t mean I’m less of a
person.’

The Self-Respect Blueprint. As a third step it might help
you to write a brief essay entitled ‘‘Why It Is Irrational and
Unnecessary to Live in Fear of Disapproval or Criticism.’”’
This can be your personal blueprint for achieving greater
self-reliance and autonomy. Prepare a list of all the reasons
why disapproval is unpleasant but not fatal. A few have
already been mentioned in this chapter, and you might re-
view them before you begin to write. In your essay include

FEELING GOOD 299

only what seems convincing and helpful to you. Make sure
you believe each argument you write down so your new
sense of independence will be realistic. Don’t rationalize!
For example, the statement, ‘‘If someone disapproves of
me, I don’t need to get upset because they’re really not the
kind of person I’d care to have as a friend,’’ won’t work
because it’s a distortion. You are trying to preserve your
self-esteem by writing the other person off as no good. Stick
with what you know to be the truth.

As new ideas come to you, add them to your list. Read
it over every morning for several weeks. This might be a
first step in helping you trim other people’s negative opin-
ions and comments about you down to life-size.

Here are a few ideas that have worked well for a lot of
people. You might use some of them in your own essay.

1. Remember that when someone reacts negatively to
you, it may be his or her irrational thinking that is at
the heart of the disapproval.

2. If the criticism is valid, this need not destroy you.
You can pinpoint your error and take steps to correct
it. You can /earn from your mistakes, and you don’t
have to be ashamed of them. If you are human, then
you should and must make mistakes at times.

3. If you have goofed up, it does not follow that you are
a BORN LOSER. It is impossible to be wrong all the
time or even most of the time. Think about the thou-
sands of things you have done right in your life! Fur-
thermore, you can change and grow.

4. Other people cannot judge your worth as a human
being, only the validity or merit of specific things you
do or say.

5. Everyone will judge you differently no matter how
well you do or how badly you might behave. Dis-
approval cannot spread like wildfire, and one rejection
cannot lead to a never-ending series of rejections. So
even if worse comes to worst and you do get rejected
by someone, you can’t end up totally alone.

300 David D. Burns, M.D.

6. Disapproval and criticism are usually uncomfortable,
but the discomfort will pass. Stop moping. Get in-
volved in an activity you’ve enjoyed in the past even
though you feel certain it’s absolutely pointless to
Start.

7. Criticism and disapproval can upset you only to the
extent that you ‘‘buy into’’ the accusations being
brought against you.

8. Disapproval is rarely permanent. It doesn’t follow that
your relationship with the person who disapproves of
you will necessarily end just because you are being
criticized. Arguments are a part of living, and in the
majority of cases you can come to a common under-
standing later on.

9. If you are criticizing someone else, it doesn’t make
that person totally bad. Why give another individual
the power and right to judge you? We’re all just human
beings, not Supreme Court justices. Don’t magnify
other people until they are larger than life.

Can you come up with some additional ideas? Think about
this topic over the next few days. Jot your ideas down on
a piece of paper. Develop your own philosophy about dis-
approval. You'll be surprised to find how much this can
help you change your perspective and enhance your sense
of independence.

Verbal Techniques. \n addition to learning to think dif-
ferently about disapproval, it can be a lot of help to learn
to behave differently toward individuals who express dis-
approval. As a first step, review the assertive methods such
as the disarming technique presented in Chapter 6. Now we
will discuss some additional approaches to help you build
your skills in coping with disapproval.

First of all, if you fear someone’s disapproval, have you
ever thought of asking the person if he or she, in fact, does
look down on you? You might be pleasantly surprised to

FEELING GOOD 301

learn that the disapproval existed only in your head. Al-
though it requires some courage, the payoff can be tremen-
dous.

Remember Art, the psychiatrist described in Chapter 6,
who was receiving training at the University of Pennsyl-
vania? Art had no suspicion that a particular patient of his
might be suicidal. The patient had no history or symptoms
of depression, but felt hopelessly trapped in an intolerable
marriage. Art received a call one morning that his patient
had been found dead with a bullet hole through his head.
Although the suspicion of homicide was raised, the probable
cause of death was suicide. Art had never lost a patient in
this way. His reaction included sadness, because of his
fondness for this particular patient, and anxiety, for fear
that his supervisor and peers would disapprove of him and
look down on him for his ‘‘mistake’’ and lack of foresight.
After discussing the death with his supervisor, he asked
frankly, ‘“Do you feel I have let you down?’’ His super-
visor’s response conveyed a sense of warmth and empathy,
not rejection. Art was relieved when his supervisor told him
that he too had experienced a similar disappointment in the
past. He emphasized that this was an opportunity for Art to
learn to cope with one of the professional hazards of being
a psychiatrist. By discussing the case and refusing to give
in to his fear of disapproval, Art learned that he had made
an ‘‘error’’—he had overlooked the fact that a feeling of
‘‘*hopelessness’’ can lead to suicide in individuals who are
not clinically depressed. But he also learned that others did
not demand perfection of him, and that he wasn’t expected
to guarantee a successful outcome for any patient.

Suppose it had not turned out so well and his supervisor
or peers had condemned him for being thoughtless or in-
competent. What then? The worst possible outcome would
have been rejection. Let’s talk about some strategies for
coping with the worst conceivable eventuality.

Rejection Is Never Your Fault! Aside from bodily injury
or a destruction of your assets, the greatest pain a person

302 David D. Burns, M.D.

can try to inflict on you is through rejection. This threat is
the source of your fear when you are being ‘‘put down.”’

There are several types of rejection. The most common
and obvious is called ‘‘adolescent rejection,’’ although it is
not limited to the adolescent age-group. Suppose you have
a romantic interest in someone you are dating or have met,
and it turns out you’re not his or her cup of tea. Perhaps
it’s your looks, race, religion, or personality style that are
the problem. Or maybe you are too tall, short, fat, thin,
old, young, smart, dull, aggressive, passive, etc. Since you
don’t fit that person’s mental image of an ideal mate closely
enough, he or she rebuffs your advances and gives you the
cold shoulder.

Is this your fault? Obviously not! The individual is simply
turning you down because of subjective preferences and
tastes. One person may like apple pie better than cherry pie.
Does this mean that cherry pie is inherently undesirable?
Romantic interests are almost infinitely variable. If you are
one of those toothpaste-commercial types who is blessed
with what our culture defines as ‘‘good looks’’ and an ap-
pealing personality, it will be much easier for you to attract
potential dates and mates. But you will learn this mutual
attraction is a far cry from developing a Joving permanent
relationship, and even the beautiful and handsome types
will have to cope with rejection sometimes. No one can
turn on each and every person they meet.

If you are only average or below average in appearance
and personality, you will have to work harder initially to
attract people, and you may have to cope with more frequent
turndowns. You will have to develop your social skills and
master some powerful secrets of making people feel at-
tracted to you. These are: (1) Don’t sell yourself short by
looking down on yourself. Refuse to persecute yourself.
Boost your self-esteem to the hilt with the methods outlined
in Chapter 4. If you love yourself, people will respond to
this sense of joy you radiate and want to be close to you.
(2) Express genuine compliments to people. Instead of wait-
ing around nervously to find out tf they will like you or

FEELING GOOD 303

reject you, like them first and Jet them know about it.
(3) Show an interest in other people by learning about what
turns them on. Get them to talk about what excites them
most, and respond to their comments in an upbeat manner.

If you persevere along these lines, you will eventually
discover there are people who find you attractive, and you
in turn will discover you have a great capacity for happiness.
Adolescent rejection is an uncomfortable nuisance, but it’s
not the end of the world and it’s not your fault.

‘*Ah ha!’’ you retort. “‘But how about the situation where
a lot of people reject you because you turn them off with
your abrasive mannerisms? Suppose you’re conceited and
self-centered. Certainly that’s your fault, isn’t it?’’ This is
a second type of rejection, which I call ‘‘angry rejection.’’
Again, I think you will see that it’s not your fault if you
are angrily rejected because of a personal fault.

In the first place, other people aren’t obliged to reject you
just because they find things about you they don’t like—
they have other options. They can be assertive and point
out what they don’t like about your behavior, or they can
learn not to let 1t bother them so much. Of course, they
have the right to avoid and reject you if they want, and they
are free to choose any friends they prefer. But this doesn’t
mean that you are an inherently “‘bad’’ human being, and
it is definitely not the case that everyone will react to you
in the same negative way. You will experience a sponta-
neous chemistry with some people, whereas you will tend
to clash with others. This ts no one’s fault, it’s just a fact
of life.

If you have a personality quirk that alienates more people
than you would like—such as being excessively critical or
losing your temper frequently—it would definitely be to
your advantage to modify your style. But it’s ridiculous to
blame yourself if someone rejects you based on this im-
perfection. We’re all imperfect, and your tendency to fault
yourself—or to ‘‘buy tnto’’ the hostility that someone else
directs at you—is self-defeating and pointless.

The third type of rejection is “‘manipulative rejection.’

bd

304 David D. Burns, M.D.

In this case the other person uses the threat of withdrawal
Or rejection to manipulate you in some way. Unhappy
spouses, and even frustrated psychotherapists, sometimes
resort to this ploy to coerce you into changing. The formula
goes like this: ‘‘Either you do such and such or we’re all
through!’’ This is a highly irrational and usually self-
defeating way of trying to influence people. Such manip-
ulative rejection is simply a culturally taught coping pattern,
and it is usually ineffective. It rarely leads to an enhanced
relationship because it generates tenston and resentment.
What it really indicates is a low frustration tolerance and
poor interpersonal skills on the part of the individual making
the threat. It certainly isn’t your fault that they do this, and
it usually isn’t to your advantage to let yourself be manip-
ulated this way.

So much for the theoretical aspects. Now, what can you
say and do when you are actually getting rejected? One
effective way to learn is to use role-playing. To make the
dialogue more entertaining and challenging, I will play the
role of the rejector and confront you with the worst things
about you | can think of. Since I’m acting caustic and
insulting, begin by asking if I am in fact rejecting you
because of the way I’ve been treating you lately:

You: Dr. Burns, I notice you’ve been acting somewhat
cool and distant. You seem to be avoiding me.
When I try to talk to you, you either ignore me or
snap at me. I wonder if you’re upset with me or
if you’ve had thoughts of rejecting me.

Comment: You don’t accuse me initially of rejecting you.
That would put me on the defensive. Furthermore, I might
not be rejecting you—I might be upset about the fact that
nobody’s buying my book, so I’m just generally irritable.
Just for practice, let’s assume the worst—that I am trying
to dump you.

FEELING GOOD 305

Davip: I’m glad we got it out in the open. I have in fact
decided to reject you.

You: Why? Apparently I’ ve been turning you off a lot.
Davib: You’re a no-good piece of rot.

You: Ian see you’re upset with me. Just what have
I been doing wrong?

Comment: You avoid defending yourself. Since you know
you are not a ‘‘piece of rot,’’ there’s no point in insisting
to me that you’re not. It will just fire me up more, and our
dialogue will quickly deteriorate into a shouting match.
(This ‘‘empathy method’’ was presented in detail in Chap-
ter 6.)

DavibD: Everything about you stinks.

You: Can you be specific? Did I forget to use deo-
dorant? Are you upset by the way I talk, some-
thing I’ve said lately, my clothes, or what?

Comment: Again, you resist getting sucked into an ar-
gument. By urging me to pinpoint what I dislike about you,
you are forcing me to fire my best shot and say something
meaningful or end up looking like an ass.

Davip: Well, you hurt my feelings when you put me
down the other day. You don’t give a damn about
me. I’m just a “‘thing’’ to you, not a human
being.

Comment: This is a common criticism. It tips you off that
the rejector basically cares for you, but feels deprived and
fears losing you. The rejector decides to lash out at you to
protect his shaky self-esteem. The rejector might also say
you’re too stupid, too fat, too selfish, etc. Whatever the
nature of the criticism, your strategy is now twofold:
(a) Find some grain of truth in the criticism and let the
rejector know you agree in part (see the ‘‘disarming tech-

306 David D. Burns, M.D.

nique,’’ Chapter 6); (b) apologize or offer to try to correct
any actual error you actually did make (see ‘‘feedback and
negotiation,’ Chapter 6).

You:

DAVID:

YOu:

DAVID:

You:

I’m really sorry I said something that rubbed you
the wrong way. What was it?

You told me I was a no-good jerk. So I’ve had
it with you—this 1s the end.

I can see that was a thoughtless, hurtful comment
[ made. What other things have I said that hurt
your feelings? Was that all? Or have I done this
many times? Go ahead and say all the bad things
you think about me.

You're unpredictable. You can be sweet as
sugar, and then all of a sudden you’re cutting
me to shreds with your sharp tongue. When you
get mad, you turn into a foul-mouthed pig. I can’t
stand you, and I can’t see how anyone else puts
up with you. You’re arrogant and cocky, and
don’t give a damn about anyone but yourself.
You’re a selfish snot, and it’s time you woke up
and learned the hard way. I’m sorry I’ve got to
be the one to put you down, but it’s the only
way you're going to learn. You have no real
feelings for anyone but yourself, and we’re
through for good!

Well, I can see there are numerous problems in
our relationship we’ve never looked at, and it
sounds like I’ve really been missing the boat. I
can see that I have been acting irritable and
thoughtless. I can see how unpleasant I’ve been
and how uncomfortable it’s been for you. Tell
me more about this side of me.

Comment: You then continue to extract negative com-
ments from the rejector. Avoid being defensive and continue
to find some grain of truth in what the rejector says. After

FEELING GOOD 307

you have elicited all the criticisms and agreed with whatever
was true about them, you are ready to fire the sharpest arrow
Straight into the rejector’s balloon. Point out that you have
acknowledged your imperfections and that you are willing
to try to correct your errors. Then ask the rejector why he
is rejecting you. This maneuver will help you see why
rejection is never your fault! You are responsible for your
errors, and you will assume responsibility for trying to cor-
rect them. But if someone rejects you for your imperfec-
tions, that’s their goofiness, not yours! Here’s how this
works.

You: 1 can see I’ve done and said a number of things
you don’t like. I’m certainly willing to try to
correct these problems to the greatest extent pos-
sible. I can’t promise miracles, but if we work
at it together, | see no reason why things can’t
improve. Just by talking this way, our commu-
nications are already better. So why are you
going to reject me?

Davib: Because you infuriate me.

You: Well, sometimes differences come up between
people, but I don’t see that this has to destroy
our relationship. Are you rejecting me because
you feel infuriated or what?

Davip: You’re a no-good bum, and I refuse to talk to
you again.

You: I’m sorry you feel that way. I'd much prefer to
continue our friendship in spite of these hurt feel-
ings. Do we need to break off entirely? Maybe
this discussion was just what we needed to un-
derstand each other better. I don’t really know
why you’ve decided to reject me. Can you tell
me why?

Davib: Oh, no! I’m not being tricked by you. You
goofed up once too often, and that’s it! No second
chances! Good-bye!

308 David D. Burns, M.D.

Comment: Now whose goofy behavior is this? Yours or
the one who is rejecting you? Whose fault is it that the
rejection occurs? After all, you offer to try to correct your
errors and to improve the relationship through frank com-
munication and compromise. So how can you be blamed
for the rejection? Obviously you can’t.

Using the above approach may not prevent all actual
rejections, but you will enhance the probability of a positive
outcome sooner or later.

Recovering from Disapproval or Rejection. You ac-
tually have been disapproved of or rejected in spite of your
efforts to improve the relationship with the other person.
How can you most quickly overcome the emotional upset
you understandably feel? First, you must realize that life
goes on, so this particular disappointment need not impair
the quality of your happiness forever. Following the rejec-
tion or disapproval it will be your thoughts which are doing
the emotional damage, and if you fight these thoughts and
stubbornly refuse to give in to distorted self-abuse, the upset
will pass.

One method which might be quite helpful is one that has
aided people who experience prolonged grief reactions fol-
lowing the loss of a loved one. If bereaved individuals
schedule periods each day to allow themselves to be flooded
by the painful memories and thoughts of the deceased loved
one, this can accelerate and complete the grieving process.
If you do this when you are alone, it will be most helpful.
Sympathy from another person often backfires; some studies
have reported that it prolongs the painful period of mourn-
ing.

You can use this “*grieving’’ method to cope with rejec-
tion or disapproval. Schedule one or more periods of time
each day—five to ten minutes are probably enough—to think
all the sad, angry, and despairing thoughts you want. If you
feel sad, cry. If you feel mad, pound a pillow. Keep flooding
yourself with painful memories and thoughts for the full
time period you have set aside. Bitch, moan and complain

FEELING GOOD 309

nonstop! When your scheduled sad period is over, STOP
IT and carry on with life until your next scheduled cry
session. In the meantime, if you have negative thoughts,
write them down, pinpoint the distortions, and substitute
rational responses as outlined in previous chapters. You may
find this will help you gain partial control over your dis-
appointment and hasten your return to full self-esteem more
quickly than you anticipated.

Turning on the “Inner Light”

The key to emotional enlightenment ts the knowledge that
only your thoughts can affect your moods. If you are an
approval addict, you are in the bad habit of flicking your
inner switch only when someone else shines their light on
you first. And you mistakenly confuse their approval with
your Own self-approval because the two occur almost si-
multaneously. You mistakenly conclude that the other per-
son has made you feel good! The fact that you do at times
enjoy praise and compliments proves that you know how to
approve of yourself! But if you are an approval addict, you
have developed the self-defeating habit of endorsing your-
self only when someone you respect approves of you first.

Here’s a simple way to break that habit. Obtain the wrist
counter described in earlier chapters and wear it for at least
two or three weeks. Every day try to notice positive things
about yourself—things you do well whether or not you get
an external reward. Each time you do something you ap-
prove of, click the counter. For example, if you smile
warmly at an associate one morning, click whether he scowls
or smiles back. If you make that phone call you were putting
off—click the counter! You can ‘‘endorse’’ yourself for big
or trivial things. You can even click it tf you remember
positive things you did in the past. For example, you might
recall the day you got your driver’s license or your first job.
Click the counter whether or not you have a positive emo-
tional arousal. Initially you may have to force yourself to

310 David D. Burns, M.D.

notice good things about yourself, and it may seem me-
chanical. Persist anyway because after several days | think
you will notice that the inner light is beginning to glow—
dimly at first and then more brightly. Every night look at
the digits on the counter and record the total number of
personal endorsements on your daily log. After two or three
weeks, I suspect you will begin to learn the art of self-
respect, and you will feel much better about yourself. This
simple procedure can be a big first step toward achieving
independence and self-approval. It sounds easy—and it is.
It’s surprisingly powerful, and the rewards will be well
worth the small amount of time and effort involved.

Chapter 12

The Love Addiction

The ‘‘silent assumption’’ which often goes hand in hand
with the fear of disapproval is ‘‘I cannot be a truly happy
and fulfilled human being unless I am loved by a member
of the opposite sex. True love is necessary for ultimate
happiness. ”’

The demand or need for love before you can feel happy
is called ‘‘dependency.’’ Dependency means that you are
unable to assume responsibility for your emotional life.

The Disadvantages of Being a Love Junkie. Is being
loved an absolute necessity or a desirable option?

Roberta is a thirty-three-year-old single woman who
moped around her apartment evenings and weekends be-
cause she told herself, “‘It’s a couple’s world. Without a
man I am nothing.’’ She came to my office attractively
groomed, but her comments were bitter. She was brimming
with resentment because she was sure that being loved was
as crucial as the oxygen she breathed. However, she was
so needy and greedy that this tended to drive people away.

I suggested that she start by preparing a list of the ad-
vantages and disadvantages of believing that *‘without a
man (or woman) I am nothing.’’ The disadvantages on Ro-
berta’s list were clear-cut: ‘*(1) This belief makes me de-

311

312 David D. Burns, M.D.

spondent since I have no lover. (2) Furthermore, it takes
away any incentive I might have to do things and go places.
(3) It makes me feel lazy. (4) It brings on a sense of self-
pity. (5) It robs me of self-pride and confidence, and makes
me envious of others and bitter. (6) Finally, it brings on
self-destructive feelings and a terrible fear of being alone.’’

Then she listed what she thought were the advantages of
believing that being loved was an absolute necessity for
happiness: ‘‘(1) This belief will bring me a companion, love,
and security. (2) It will give purpose to my life and a reason
to live. (3) It will give me events to look forward to.’’ These
advantages reflected Roberta’s belief that telling herself she
couldn’t live without a man would somehow bring a com-
panion into her life.

Were these advantages real or tmaginary? Although Ro-
berta had believed for many years that she couldn't exist
without a man, this attitude still hadn’t brought a desirable
mate. She admitted that making men so totally important
in her life was not the magic charm that would bring one
to her doorstep. She acknowledged that clinging and de-
pendent individuals often demand so much attention from
other people and appear so needy that they have great dif-
ficulty not only initially attracting people of the opposite
sex but also maintaining an ongoing relationship. Roberta
was able to grasp the idea that people who have found
happiness within themselves are usually the most desirable
to members of the opposite sex and become like magnets
because they are at peace and generate a Sense of joy.
Ironically, it is usually the dependent woman, the ‘‘man-
aholic,’’ who ends up alone.

This really isn’t so surprising. If you take the position
you ““*need’”’ someone else for a sense of worth, you broad-
cast the following: ‘Take me! I have no inherent worth! I
can’t stand myself!’’ No wonder there are so few buyers!
Of course, your unstated demand does not endear people to
you either: ““Since you’re obliged to love me, you’re rotten
shit if you don’t.’’

You may cling to your dependency because of the er-

FEELING GOOD 313

roneous notion that if you do achieve independence, others
will see you as a rejecting person and you will end up alone.
If this is your fear, you are equating dependency with
warmth. Nothing could be farther from the truth. If you are
lonely and dependent, your anger and resentment stem from
the fact that you feel deprived of the love you believe you
are entitled to receive from others. This attitude drives you
farther into isolation. If you are more independent, you are
not obliged to be alone—you simply have the capacity to
feel happy when you are alone. The more independent you
are, the more secure you will be in your feelings. Further-
more, your moods will not go up and down at someone
else’s mercy. After all, the amount of love that someone
can feel for you is often quite unpredictable. They may not
appreciate everything about you, and they may not act in
an affectionate way all the time. If you are willing to learn
to love yourself, you will have a far more dependable and
continuous source of self-esteem.

The first step is to find out if you want independence.
All of us have a much greater chance of achieving our goals
if we understand what they are. It helped Roberta to realize
that her dependency was condemning her to an empty ex-
istence. If you are still clinging to the notion that it is
desirable to be ‘‘dependent,’’ list the advantages, using the
double-column technique. Spell out how you benefit if you
let love determine your personal worth. Then in order to
assess the situation objectively, write down the counter-
arguments, or rational responses, in the nght-hand column.
You may learn that the advantages of your love addiction
are partially or totally illusory. Figure 12—1 shows how a
woman with a problem similar to Roberta’s assessed these
issues. This written exercise motivated her to look within
herself for what she had been seeking in others, and enabled
her to see that her dependency was the real enemy because
it incapacitated her.

Perceiving the Difference Between Loneliness and
Being Alone. As you read the previous section you may

Figure 12—1. An Analysis of the Presumed “Advantages” of
Being a “Love Junkie.”

Advantages of Being
Dependent
on Love to Be Happy

|. Someone will take 1.

Rational Responses

This is also true of independent

care of me when I’m
hurt.

. But if I am dependent,
I won’t have to make
decisions.

. But as an independent
person, I might make
the wrong decision.
Then I'd have to pay
the consequences.

. But if | am a depen-
dent person, I won't
have to think. I can
just react to things.

4.

people. If I am in an auto acci-
dent, they will take me to an
emergency room. The doctors
will care for me whether I am a
dependent or independent per-
son. It is nonsense that only de-
pendent people get help when
they are hurt.

But as a dependent person, I will
have much less control over my
life. It is unreliable to depend on
other people to make decisions
for me. For example, do I want
someone else to tell me what to
wear today or what to eat for
dinner? They might not choose
the thing that is my first choice.

So pay the consequences—you
can learn from your mistakes if
you are independent. No one can
be perfect, and there are no guar-
antees Of absolute certainty in
life. The uncertainty can be part
of the spice of life. It’s how I
cope—not whether I am right all
the time—that forms the basis of
self-respect. And besides, | will
be able to take the credit when
things work out well.

Independent people can also
choose not to think if they want
to. There is no rule that says that
only dependent people have the
right to stop thinking.

Figure 12-1. cont.

Advantages of Being
Dependent
on Love to Be Happy

5. Butif lam dependent, 5.
I will be gratified. It
will be like eating
candy. It feels good to
have someone to care
for me and to lean on.

6. But if | am a depen- 6.
dent person, I will be
loved. Without love I
couldn't live.

7. But some men are 7.
looking for dependent
women.

Rational Responses

Candy gets nauseating after a
while. The person I choose to
depend on may not be willing to
love and stroke me, and take
care of me forever. He may get
tired of it after a while. And if
he withdraws from me either
through anger or resentment, |
will then feel miserable because
I?ll have nothing else to rely on.
They will be able to manipulate
me if I am dependent, just like
a Slave or robot.

As an independent person, I can
learn to love myself and this may
make me even more desirable to
others, and tf I can learn to love
myself, I can always be loved.
My dependency in the past has
driven others away from me
more frequently than it has at-
tracted people to me. Babies
can’t survive without love and
support, but | won’t die without
love.

There’s some truth to this, but
relationships which are based on
dependency frequently fall apart
and culminate in divorce be-
cause you are asking the other
person to give you something
which they are not in the position
to give: namely, self-esteem and
self-respect. Only I can make
myself happy, and if I rely on
someone else to do this for me,
I am likely to be bitterly disap-
pointed in the end.

316 David D. Burns, M.D.

have concluded that it would be to your advantage if you
could learn to regulate your moods and find happiness within
yourself. This would give you the capacity to feel as alive
when you are alone as when you are with someone you
love. But you may be thinking, “*That all sounds well and
good, Dr. Burns, but it is not realistic. The truth is that it
is undeniably emotionally inferior to be alone. All my life
I have known that love and happiness are identical, and all
my friends agree. You can philosophize until you’re blue
in the face. But when it comes down to the bottom line,
love is where it’s at and being alone is a curse!’’

In fact, many people are convinced that love makes the
world go around. You see this message in ads, you hear it
in popular songs, you read it in poems.

You can however convincingly disprove your assumption
that love is necessary before you can experience happiness.
Let’s take a hard look at the equation, alone = lonely.

Consider, first, that we get many of life’s basic satisfac-
tions by ourselves. For example, when you climb a moun-
tain, pick a flower, read a book, or eat a hot fudge sundae,
you do not require someone else’s company for these ex-
periences to be enjoyable. A physician can enjoy the sat-
isfaction of treating a patient whether or not he and the
patient are involved in a meaningful personal relationship.
When writing a book, an author is generally by himself or
herself. As most students know, you do most of your learn-
ing when you are alone. The list of pleasures and satisfac-
tions that you can enjoy when alone is endless.

This indicates that many sources of gratification are ac-
cessible to you whether or not you are with someone else.
Can you add to that list? What are some pleasures that you
can have alone? Do you ever listen to good music on your
stereo? Do you enjoy gardening? Jogging? Carpentry? Hik-
ing? A lonely bank teller named Janet, who was recently
separated from her husband, enrolled in a creative dancing
class and found (to her surprise) that she could derive enor-
mous pleasure from practicing by herself at home. As she
became caught up in the rhythm of the movements, she felt

FEELING GOOD 317

at peace with herself in spite of the fact that she had no one
to love.

Perhaps you are thinking now, ‘‘Oh, Dr. Burns, is that
your point? Well, it’s trivial! Of course, I can experience
temporary moments of mediocre distraction by doing things
when I’m alone. This might take the edge off the blues, but
those things are just some crumbs from the table that might
keep me from starving totally. 1 want the banquet, the real
thing! Love! True and complete happiness!’

That was exactly what Janet told me before she enrolled
in the dancing class. Because she assumed it was miserable
to be alone, it hadn’t occurred to her to do enjoyable things
and care for herself during the separation from her husband.
She had been living according to a double standard whereby
if she was with her husband, she would go to great lengths
to plan pleasurable activities, but when she was alone, she
would simply mope and do very little. This pattern obviously
functioned as a self-fulfilling prophecy, and she did in fact
find it unpleasant to be alone. Why? Simply because she
failed to treat herself in a caring way. It had never occurred
to her to challenge her lifelong assumption that all her ac-
tivities would be unsatisfactory unless she had someone to
share them with. On another occasion, instead of heating a
TV dinner after work, Janet decided to plan a special meal,
just as if she were going to entertain a man she cared a lot
about. She carefully prepared her dinner and set the table
with candles. She began with a glass of fine wine. After
dinner she read a good book and listened to her favorite
music. To her amazement, she found the evening a total
pleasure. The next day, which was Saturday, Janet decided
to go to the art museum alone. She was surprised to discover
that she got more enjoyment out of this excursion alone
than she had in the past when dragging her reluctant and
disinterested husband along.

As a result of adopting an active, compassionate attitude
toward herself, Janet discovered for the first time in her life
that she could not only make it on her own but could really
enjoy herself.

318 David D. Burns, M.D.

As is so often the case, she began to generate an infectious
joy of living that caused many individuals to feel attracted
to her, and she began to date. In the meantime her husband
began to get disillusioned with his girl friend and wanted
his wife back. He noticed Janet was happy as a lark without
him, and at this point the tables began to turn. After Janet
told him she no longer wanted him back, he suffered a
severe depression. She ultimately established a very satis-
fying relationship with another man and remarried. The key
to her success was simple—as a first step, she proved that
she could develop a relationship with herself. After this,
the rest was easy.

The Pleasure-Predicting Method

I don’t expect you to rely on my word on this topic, or
even on the reports of others like Janet who have learned
how to experience the joys of self-reliance. Instead, I pro-
pose you perform a series of experiments, just as Janet did,
to test out your belief that ‘‘being alone is a curse.’’ If you
are willing to do this, you can arrive at the truth in an
objective, scientific manner.

To help you, I have developed the ‘‘Pleasure-Predicting
Sheet’” shown in Figure 12—2. This form is divided into a
series of columns in which you predict and record the actual!
amount of satisfaction you derive from various work and
recreational activities you engage tn when alone, as well as
from those you share with other people. In the first column,
record the date of each experiment. In the second column,
write down several activities that you plan to do as a part
of that day’s experiments. I suggest that you carry out a
series of forty or fifty experiments over a two- to three-
week period. Choose activities that would ordinarily give
you a sense of accomplishment or pleasure, or which have
the potential for learning or personal growth. In the third
column, record who you do the activity with. If you do it
alone, write ‘‘self’’ in this column. (This word will remind

%S6
(j3893 possed) 9666
%S9
%08

%OL
(juouInsie) %0¢

%S8
%08
%S8
%SL
%08
%SL
%S9

(ApANIY ays (AnANoy ays asofag
4ayfY SIU], p4o0zay) SINT, afm)
(%00I-0) (%00I-0)

uUOoNID{SYDS JONJIV

sjsons poytaul Aue

UONID{SIDS pajaIpadd

JTS
JoyIoul
JTS
td
uoleys
JoyOUl

JTes
jyes
J[9s

woreys

J[9s
JT9s

(flag Mfioads
‘aUory JI) YIM

SUL OC NOX PIT OY

OJOS UBIO DOI 0} BTOADIQ Ophy
1$9} SUIALIP JO] OH
wiexs Joy Apms
eq
yred out 01 YJB
JOyIeU 0} OH
onbiynoq
ye asno[q Joy surddoys oH
Suissor
[OAOU Pedy
Ayeg
AOPT
YI9NUOD YOOI 0} OH
JOJUIO SCID PUL SLC ISTA

(AANSDA] gq 40
juamadaiyoy fo asuag)
‘Uonon{syos sof Ajay

66/91/6
66/91/6
66/S 1/6
66/V1/6
66/01/6
66/01/6

66/6/6
66/9/6
66/C/6
66/0¢/8
66/97/8
66/61/8
66/81/8

ajvq

‘yOouS SuNoipalg-snsesfg UL 'z-g} eunbi4


320 David D. Burns, M.D.

you that you are never really alone, since you are always
with yourself!) In the fourth column, predict the satisfaction
you think you will derive from this activity, estimating it
on a scale of between 0 and 100 percent. The higher the
number, the greater the anticipated satisfaction. Fill in the
fourth column before you do each planned activity, not after!

Once you have filled in the columns, proceed with the
activities. Once they are completed, record the actual sat-
isfaction in the last column, using the same 0- to 100-percent
rating system.

After you have performed a series of such experiments,
you will be able to interpret the data you have collected.
You can learn many things. First, by comparing the pre-
dicted satisfaction (column four) with the actual satisfaction
(column five), you will be able to find out how accurate
your predictions are. You may find that you typically un-
derestimate the amount of satisfaction you anticipate ex-
periencing, especially when doing things alone. You might
also be surprised to learn that activities with others are not
always as satisfying as anticipated. In fact, you may even
find that there are many times when it was more enjoyable
to be alone, and you might discover that the highest ratings
you received when you were alone were equal to or higher
than those for activities involving others. It can be helpful
to compare the amount of satisfaction you derived from
work activities versus pleasurable activities. This infor-
mation can help you achieve an optimal balance between
work and fun as you continue to plan your activities.

Questions are probably now crossing your mind, ‘‘Sup-
pose I do something and it isn’t as satisfying as I predicted?
Or suppose I make a low prediction and it really comes out
that way?’’ In this case try to pinpoint the automatic negative
thoughts that dampen the experience for you. Then talk back
to these thoughts. For example, a lonely sixty-five-year-old
woman whose children were all grown and married decided
to enroll in an evening course. All the other students were
of college freshman age. She felt tense the first week of
classes because of her thought, ‘‘They probably think I’m

FEELING GOOD 321

an old bag with no right to be here.’” When she reminded
herself she had no idea what the other students thought of
her, she felt some relief. After talking to another student,
she found out that some of them admired her gumption. She
then felt much better, and her satisfaction levels began to
climb.

Now let’s see how the Pleasure-Predicting Sheet can be
used to overcome dependency. Joanie was a fifteen-year-
old high-school student who had suffered from a chronic
depression for several years after her parents moved to a
new town. She had difficulty making friends in the new
high school, and believed, as many teenage girls do, that
she had to have a boyfriend and be a member of the ‘‘in
crowd’’ before she could be happy. She spent nearly all her
free time at home alone, studying and feeling sorry for
herself. She resisted and resented the suggestion she start
going out and doing things because she claimed there would
simply be no point in doing them alone. Until a circle of
friends magically dropped into her lap, she seemed deter-
mined to sit and brood.

I persuaded Joanie to use the Pleasure-Predicting Sheet.
Figure 12—2 shows that Joanie scheduled a variety of ac-
tivities, such as visiting an arts and crafts center on a Sat-
urday, going to a rock concert, etc. Because she did them
alone, she anticipated they would be unrewarding, as in-
dicated by her low predictions in column four. She was
surprised to find she actually did have a reasonably good
time. As this pattern tended to repeat itself, she began to
realize that she was predicting things in an unrealistic neg-
ative way. As she did more and more on her own, her mood
began to improve. She still wanted friends, but no longer
felt condemned to misery when she was alone. Because she
proved she could make it on her own, her self-confidence
went up. She then became more assertive with her peers,
and invited several people to a party. This helped her de-
velop a network of friends, and she found that boys as well
as girls in her high-school class were interested in her. Joanie
continued to use the Pleasure-Predicting Sheet to evaluate

322 David D. Burns, M.D.

the levels of satisfaction she experienced in dates and ac-
tivities with her new friends. She was surprised to find that
they were comparable to the enjoyment levels she experi-
enced in doing things alone.

There 1s a difference between wanting and needing some-
thing. Oxygen ts a need, but love is a want. I repeat: LOVE
[S NOT AN ADULT HUMAN NEED)! It’s okay to want a
loving relationship with another human being. There is noth-
ing wrong with that. It is a delicious pleasure to be involved
in a good relationship with someone you love. But you do
not need that external approval, love, or attention in order
to survive or to experience maximal levels of happiness.

Attitude Modification. Just as love, companionship, and
marriage are not necessary for happiness and self-esteem,
they are not sufficient either. The proof of this is the millions
of men and women who are married and miserable. If love
were the antidote to depression, then I would soon be out
of business because the vast majority of the suicidal indi-
viduals I treat are in fact loved very dearly by their spouses,
children, parents, and friends. Love is not an effective an-
tidepressant. Like tranquilizers, alcohol, and sleeping pills,
it often makes the symptoms worse.

In addition to restructuring your activities more crea-
tively, challenge the upsetting negative thoughts that flow
through your mind when you are alone.

This was helpful to Maria, a lovely thirty-year-old single
woman, who found that when she did activities on her own,
she sometimes soured the experience unnecessarily by tell-
ing herself, ‘‘Being alone is a curse.’” In order to combat
the feelings of self-pity and resentment this thought created,
she wrote a list of counterarguments (see Figure 12—3, page
323). She reported this was very helpful in breaking the
cycle of loneliness and depression.

Over a year after terminating my work with her I sent
her an early draft of this chapter, and she wrote back: ‘‘Last
night I read very thoroughly the chapter... It proves that

FEELING GOOD 323

|
Figure 12-3. “Being alone is a curse.” Counterarguments: The
advantages of being alone.

OL. Being alone gives a person the opportunity to explore what
she or he really thinks, feels, and knows.

2. Being alone gives the person a chance to try all sorts of
new things that might be harder to try if one had ties to a
housemate, spouse, etc. |

3. Being alone forces you to develop your personal strengths.

4. Being alone enables you to put aside excuses for taking
' responsibility for yourself.

5. Being a woman alone is better than being a woman with an
unsuitable male mate. The same applies to a man.

_6. Being a woman alone can be an opportunity to develop into
a full human being and not be an appendage to a man.

7. Being a woman alone can be helpful in making you more
understanding of the problems women in different situations
face. This can help you learn to be more supportive of other
women and can enable you to develop more meaningful
relationships with them. The same could also apply to men
and their understanding of various male problems.

8. Being a woman alone can show a woman that even if she
later lived with a man, she need not be constantly afraid of
his leaving her or dying. She knows that she can live alone
and has the potential for happiness within herself; thus, the

| relationship can be one of mutual enhancement rather than
one of mutual dependency and demandingness.

it is not being alone that is so bad or so good, but rather
how one thinks regarding that or any other condition of
being. Thoughts are so powerful! They can make or break
you, right? . . . Itis almost funny, but now I am almost afraid
to ‘have a man.’ I| do rather well, maybe better, without
one... Dave, did you ever think you would hear this from
me?’’

The double-column technique can be especially useful in
helping you overcome the negative thinking pattern that

324 David D. Burns, M.D.

makes you fear standing on your own two feet. For example,
a divorced woman with one child contemplated suicide be-
cause her lover—a married man—had broken off with her.
She had an intensely negative self-image, and didn’t believe
that she would ever be capable of sustaining an ongoing
relationship. She was sure she would always end up a reject
and a loner. She wrote in her journal the following thoughts
as she contemplated a suicide attempt:

The empty place in the bed next to me silently mocks
me. I am alone—alone—my greatest fear, my most
dreaded fate, a reality. | am a woman alone and in my
mind that means I am nothing. The logic I am operating
on goes something like this:

1. If 1 were desirable and attractive there would be a
man beside me now.

2. There is no man beside me.

3. Therefore | am undesirable and unattractive.

4. Therefore there is no point in living.

She went on to ask herself in her journal, ‘‘Why do |
need a man? A man would solve all my problems. He would
take care of me. He would give my life direction and most
importantly he would provide me with a reason to get out
of bed each morning when all I now want to do ts put my
head under the covers and sink into oblivion.”’

She then utilized the double-column technique as a way
of challenging the upsetting thoughts in her mind. She la-
beled the left-hand column ‘‘Accusations of My Dependent
Self,’’ and labeled the right-hand column ‘*Counterargu-
ments of My Independent Self.’’ She then carried out a
dialogue with herself to determine what the truth of the
matter really was (see Figure 12—4, page 325).

After doing the written exercise, she decided to read it
over each morning in order to develop the motivation to get
out of bed. She wrote the following outcome in her personal
diary:

Figure 12—4.

Accusations of My
Dependent Self

. [need a man.

. Because I can’t cope
on my own.

. Okay. But I’m lonely.

. Yes, but they don’t
count.

. But people will think
no man wants me.

. I think | am nothing
without a man.

. Actually nothing.
Everything important

I’ve done on my own.

. I guess I don’t need a
man. { just want one.

FEELING GOOD 325

Counterarguments of My
Independent Self

. Why do you need a man?
. Have you been coping so far

in life?

. Yes, but you have a child and

you do have friends, and you
have enjoyed being with them
very much.

. They don’t count because you

dismiss them.

. People will think what they

want to think. What is impor-
tant is what you think. Only
your thoughts and beliefs can
affect your moods.

. What did you accomplish hav-

ing a man that you couldn’t ac-
complish on your own?

. Then why do you need a man?

. It’s fine to want things. They

just can’t become so important
that life loses its meaning with-
out them.

I learned to see that there is a big difference between
wanting and needing. I want a man but I no longer
feel that I must have a man to survive. By maintaining
a more realistic inner dialogue with myself and by
looking at my own strengths, by listing and reading
and reading again the things that I have obtained on
my own, I slowly am beginning to develop a sense of

326 David D. Burns, M.D.

confidence in my ability to handle what might come.
I find that I am taking better care of myself. I am
treating myself as I would have treated a beloved friend
in the past with kindness and compassion, with a tol-
erance for flaws and an appreciation of assets. Now I
can view a difficult situation not as a pestilence es-
pecially contrived to plague me but as an opportunity
to practice the skills I am learning, to challenge my
negative thoughts, to reaffirm my strengths and to en-
hance my confidence in my ability to deal with life.

Chapter 13

Your Work Is Not Your Worth

A third silent assumption that leads to anxiety and depression
is ‘‘My worth as a human being is proportional to what |
have achieved in my life.’’ This attitude is at the core of
Western culture and the Protestant work ethic. It sounds
innocent enough. In fact, it is self-defeating, grossly in-
accurate, and malignant.

Ned, the physician described in earlier chapters, called
me at home one recent Sunday evening. He had been feeling
panicky all weekend. His upset was triggered by plans to
attend the twentieth reunion of his college class (he grad-
uated from an Ivy League college). He had been invited to
give the keynote address to the alumni. Why was Ned in
such a state of apprehension? He was concerned that he
might meet up with some classmate at his reunion who had
achieved more than he had. He explained why this was so
threatening: ‘‘It would mean I was a failure.’’

Ned’s exaggerated preoccupation with his achievements
is particularly common among men. While women are not
immune to career concerns, they are more likely to be de-
pressed after the loss of love or approval. Men, in contrast,
are especially vulnerable to concerns about career failure
because they’ve been programmed from childhood to base
their worth on their accomplishments.

The first step in changing any personal value is to deter-

327

328 David D. Burns, M.D.

mine if it works more to your advantage or disadvantage.
Deciding that it will not really help you to measure your
worth by what you produce is the crucial first step in chang-
ing your philosophy. Let’s begin with a pragmatic approach,
a cost-benefit analysis.

Clearly, there can be some advantage to equating your
self-esteem with your accomplishments. In the first place,
you can say “‘I’m okay”’ and feel good about yourself when
you have achieved something. For example, if you win a
golf game, you can pat yourself on the back and feel a little
smug and superior to your partner because he missed his
putt on the last hole. When you go jogging with a friend
and he runs out of breath before you do, you can puff up
with pride and tell yourself, ‘‘He’s a good guy for sure, but
Pm just a little better!’’ When you make a big sale at work,
you can say, ‘I’m producing today. I’m doing a good job.
My boss will be pleased and / can respect myself.’’ Essen-
tially, your work ethic allows you to feel you’ve earned
personal worth and the night to feel happy.

This belief system may make you especially motivated
to produce. You might put extra effort into your career
because you’re convinced this will give you extra worthiness
units, and you will therefore see yourself as a more desirable
person. You can avoid the horrors of being “‘just average.”’
In a nutshell, you may work harder to win, and when you
win you may like yourself better.

Let’s look at the other side of the coin. What are the
disadvantages of your philosophy of ‘‘worth equals achieve-
ment’’? First, if your business or career is going well, you
may become so preoccupied with it that you may inadver-
tently cut yourself off from other potential sources of sat-
isfaction and enjoyment as you slave away from early
morning to late night. As you become more and more of a
workaholic, you will feel excessively driven to produce
because if you fail to keep up the pace, you will experience
a severe withdrawal characterized by inner emptiness and
despair. In the absence of achievement, you'll feel worthless

FEELING GOOD 329

and bored because you’!! have no other basis for self-respect
and fulfillment.

Suppose as a result of illness, business reversal, retire-
ment, or some other factor beyond your control, you find
you are unable to produce at the same high level for a period
of time. Now you may pay the price of a severe depression,
triggered by the conviction that because you are less pro-
ductive it means you are no good. You’! feel like a tin can
that’s been used and is now ready for the trash. Your lack
of self-esteem might even culminate in a sutcide attempt,
the ultimate payment for measuring your worth exclusively
by the standards of the marketplace. Do you want this? Do
you need this?

There may be other prices to pay. If your family suffers
from your neglect, a certain resentment may build up. For
a long time they may hold it in, but sooner or later you’ll
get the bill. Your wife has been having an affair and is
talking about divorce. Your fourteen-year-old son has been
arrested for burglary. When you try to talk with him, he
snubs you: “‘Where’ve you been all these years, Dad?’’
Even if these unfortunate developments do not happen to
you, you will still have one great disadvantage—the lack
of true self-esteem.

I have recently begun treating a very successful busi-
nessman. He claims to be one of the top money earners in
the world in his profession. Yet he is victimized by episodic
states of fear and anxiety. What if he should fall off the
pinnacle? What if he had to give up his Rolls-Royce Silver
Cloud and drive a Chevrolet instead? That would be un-
bearable! Could he survive? Could he still love himself? He
doesn’t know if he could find happiness without the glamour
or glory. His nerves are constantly on edge because he can’t
answer these questions. What would your answer be? Would
you still respect and love yourself if you experienced a
substantial failure?

As with any addiction, you find that greater and greater
doses of your “‘upper’’ will be needed in order to become

330 David D. Burns, M.D.

‘*high.’’? This tolerance phenomenon occurs with heroin,
‘‘speed’’ (amphetamines), alcohol, and sleeping pills. It
also happens with riches, fame, and success. Why? Perhaps
because you automatically set your expectations higher and
higher once you have achieved a particular level. The ex-
citement quickly wears off. Why doesn’t the aura last? Why
do you keep needing more and more? The answer is obvious:
Success does not guarantee happiness. The two are not
identical and are not causally related. So you end up chasing
a mirage. Since your thoughts are the true key to your moods
and not success, the thrill of victory fades quickly. The old
achievements soon become old hat—you begin to feel sadly
bored and empty as you stare at your trophy case.

If you do not get the message that happiness does not
reliably and necessarily follow from success, you may work
even harder to try to recapture the feeling you once had
from being on top. This is the basis for your addiction to
work.

Many individuals seek guidance or therapy because of
the disillusionment that begins to dawn on them in their
middle or later years. Eventually these questions may con-
front you as well: What’s my life all about? What’s the
meaning of it all? You may believe your success makes you
worthwhile, but the promised payoff seems elusive, just
beyond your grasp.

As you read the above paragraphs, you may suspect that
the disadvantages of being a success junkie outweigh the
advantages. But you may still believe it is basically true
that people who are superachievers are more worthwhile—
the big shots seem “‘special’’ in some way. You may be
convinced that true happiness, as well as the respect of
others, comes primarily from achievement. But is this really
the case?

In the first place, consider the fact that most human beings
are not great achievers, yet most people are happy and well
respected. In fact, one could say that the majority of the
people in the United States are loved and happy, yet by
definition most of them are pretty much average. Thus, it

FEELING GOOD 331

cannot be the case that happiness and love come only
through great achievement. Depression, like the plague, is
no respecter of status and strikes those who live in fancy
neighborhoods as often—if not more frequently—as it does
those of average or below-average means. Clearly, happi-
ness and great achievement have no necessary connection.

Does Work = Worth?

Okay, let’s assume you’ve decided that it’s not to your
advantage to link your work and your worth, and you also
admit that achievement will not reliably bring you love,
respect, or happiness. You may still feel convinced that on
some level, people who achieve a lot are somehow better
than others. Let’s take a hard look at this notion.

First, would you say that everybody who achieves is
particularly worthwhile just because of their achievement?
Adolf Hitler was clearly a great achiever at the height of
his career. Would you say that made him particularly worth-
while? Obviously not. Of course, Hitler would have insisted
he was a great human being because he was a successful
leader and because he equated his worth and achievements.
In fact, he was probably convinced that he and his fellow
Nazis were supermen because they were achieving so much.
Would you agree with them?

Perhaps you can think of a neighbor or someone you
don’t like very much who does achieve a lot and yet seems
overly grasping and aggressive. Now, is that person espe-
cially worthwhile in your opinion just because he or she is
an achiever? In contrast, perhaps you know someone you
care for or respect who ts not a particularly great achiever.
Would you say that person is still worthwhile? [If you answer
yes, then ask yourself—if they can be worthwhile without
great achievement, then why can’t I be?

Here’s a second method. If you insist your worth is de-
termined by your achievement, you are creating a self-
esteem equation: worth = achievement. What is the basis

332 David D. Burns, M.D.

for making this equation? What objective proof do you have
that it is valid? Could you experimentally measure people’s
worth as well as their achievement so as to find out if they
were in fact equal? What units would you use to measure
it? The whole idea is nonsense.

You can’t prove the equation because it is just a stipu-
lation, a value system. You’re defining worth as achieve-
ment and achievement as worth. Why define them as each
other? Why not say worth is worth and achievement is
achievement? Worth and achievement are different words
with different meanings.

In spite of the above arguments, you may still be con-
vinced that people who achieve more are better in some
way. If so, I’m going to hit you now with a most powerful
method which, like dynamite, can shatter this attitude even
when it appears to be etched in granite.

First, | would like you to play the role of Sonia (or Bob),
an old friend from high-school! days. You have a family and
teach school. I have pursued a more ambitious career. In
the dialogue you will assume that human worth is deter-
mined by achievement, and I will push the implications of
this to their obvious, logical, and obnoxious conclusion.
Are you ready? I hope so because you’re about to be as-
saulted in a most unpleasant way by a belief you apparently
still cherish.

DaAvip: Sonia (or Bob), how are you doing?

You _ (playing the role of my old friend): Just fine,
David. How are you?

Davip: Oh, great. | haven’t seen you since high school.
What’s been happening?

You: Oh, well, I got married, and I’m teaching at Parks
High School and I have a little family at home.
Things are great.

Davip: Well, gee. I’m sorry to hear that. I turned out a
lot better than you.

You: How’s that? Come again?

FEELING GOOD 333

Davip: / went to graduate school and / got my Ph.D.
and / have become quite successful in business.
I’m earning a lot of money. In fact, ’'m one of
the wealthier people in town now. I’ve achieved
a great deal. More than you by a long shot. I
don’t mean to insult you or anything, but I guess
that means I’m a lot better person than you, huh?

You: Well, gee, Dave, I’m not sure what to say. I
thought I was a rather happy person before |
started to talk to you.

Davip: I can understand that. You’re at a loss for words,
but you might as well face facts. ’'ve got what
it takes, and you don’t. I’m glad you’re happy,
though. Mediocre, average people are entitled to
a little happiness too. After all, I certainly don’t
begrudge you a few crumbs from the banquet
table. But it’s just too bad you couldn’t have
done more with your life.

You: Dave, you seem to have changed. You were such
a nice person in high school. I get the feeling
you don’t like me anymore.

Davip: Oh, no! We can still be friends as long as you
admit you’re an inferior, second-rate person. |
just want to remind you to look up to me from
now on, and | want you to realize that I’! look
down on you because I’m more worthwhile. This
follows from the assumption that we have—
worth equals achievement. Remember that atti-
tude you cherish? I’ve achieved more, so Pm
worth more.

You: Well, I sure hope I don’t run into you soon again,
Dave. It’s not been such a pleasure talking to
you.

That dialogue cools most people off very quickly because
it illustrates how the inferior-superior system follows log-
ically from equating your worth with your achievement.

334 David D. Burns, M.D.

Actually, many people do feel inferior. The role-playing
can help you see how ludicrous the assumption is. In the
above dialogue, who was acting jerky? The happy house-
wife/schoolteacher or the arrogant businessman trying to
make a case that he was better than other people? I hope
this imaginary conversation will help you see clearly how
screwball the whole system is.

If you like, we can do a role-reversal to put the icing on
the cake. This time you play the role of the very successful
person, and I want you to try to put me down as sadistically
as you can. You can pretend to be the editor of Cosmopolitan
magazine, Helen Gurley Brown.* I went to high school
with you; I’m just an average high-school teacher now, and
it’s your job to argue that you’re better than I am.

You —_ (playing the role of Helen Gurley Brown): Dave,
how have you been? It’s been a long time.

Davib: (playing the role of a high-school teacher): Well,
fine. I have a little family, and I’m teaching high
school here. I’m a physical education teacher and
really enjoying life. | understand you’ve made it
big.

You: Yeah. Well, I really have been kind of lucky.
I’m editor of Cosmopolitan now. Perhaps you
heard.

Davip: Of course I have. I’ve seen you on TV on the
talk shows plenty of times. I hear you make a
huge income, and you even have your own agent.

You: Life’s been good. Yeah. It’s really been terrific.
Davip: Now there’s just one thing I heard about you that
I really didn’t understand. You were talking to

a friend of ours, and you were saying how you’re
so much better than I am now that you’ve made

*This is a purely imaginary dialogue having no bearing on the real Helen
Gurley Brown.

You:

DAVID:

YOu:

DAVID:

You:

FEELING GOOD 335

it big, whereas my career is just average. What
did you mean by that?

Well, Dave, I mean, just think about all the
things I’ve accomplished in my life. Here I am
influencing millions, and whoever heard of Dave
Burns in Philadelphia? I’m hobnobbing with the
Stars, and you’re bouncing a basketball around
in the court with a bunch of kids. Don’t get me
wrong. You're certainly a fine, sincere, average
person. It’s just that you never made it, so you
might as well face facts!

You’ve made a great impact, and you’re a
woman of influence and fame. I respect that a
lot, and it sounds quite rewarding and exciting.
But please forgive me if I’m dense. I just don’t
understand how that makes you a better person.
How does that make me inferior to you or make
you more worthwhile? With my little local mind,
I must be missing something obvious.

Face it, you just sit around and interact with no
particular purpose or destiny. I have charisma.
I’m a mover and shaker. That gives me a bit of
an edge, wouldn’t you say?

Well, I don’t interact to no purpose, but my
purposes may seem modest in comparison with
yours. I teach phys ed, and I coach the local
football games and that kind of thing. Your orbit
is certainly big and fancy in comparison with
mine. But I don’t understand how that makes
you a better person than | am, or how it follows
that I’m inferior to you.

I’m just more highly developed and more elab-
orate. I think about more important things. I go
on the lecture circuit, and people flock to hear
me by the thousands. Famous authors work for
me. Who do you lecture to? The local PTA?

336 David D. Burns, M.D.

DAVID:

YOu:

DAVID:

YOu:

DAVID:

Certainly in achievement, money, and influence
you’re way ahead of me. You’ve done very well.
You were very bright to begin with, and you’ ve
worked very hard. You’re a big success now.
But how does that make you more worthwhile
than 1 am? You must forgive me, but I still don’t
grasp your logic.

I’m more interesting. It’s like an amoeba versus
a highly developed biological structure. Amoe-
bas are kind of boring after a while. | mean your
life must be like an amoeba’s. You’re just bum-
bling around aimlessly. I’m a more interesting,
dynamic, desirable person; you’re second-rate.
You’re the burnt toast; I’m the caviar. Your life
is a bore. I don’t see how I can say it more
clearly.

My life isn’t as boring as you might think. Take
a close look at it. I’d be surprised to hear what
you have to say here because I can’t find anything
boring about my life. What I do is exciting and
vital to me. The people I teach are every bit as
important to me as the glamorous movie stars
you interact with. But even if it were true that
my life was more tedious and routine and less
interesting than yours, how would that make you
a better person or more worthwhile?

Well, I suppose it just really boils down to the
fact that if you have an amoeba existence, then
you can only judge it on the basis of your amoeba
mentality. I can judge your situation, but you
can’t judge mine.

What is the basis for your judgment? You can
call me an amoeba, but I don’t know what that
means. You seem to be reduced to name-calling.
All it means is that apparently my life is not
especially interesting to you. Certainly I’m not

YOu:

DAVID:

You:

DAVID:

You:

DAVID:

You:

DAVID:

You:

DAVID:

YOu:

DAVID:

FEELING GOOD 337

nearly as successful or glamorous, but how does
that make you a better or more worthwhile per-
son?

I’m almost starting to give up.

Don’t give up here. Press on. Perhaps you are
a better person!

Well, certainly society values me more. That’s
what makes me better.

It makes you more highly valued by society.
That’s undoubtedly the case. | mean Johnny Car-
son hasn’t contacted me for any appearances re-
cently.

I’ve noticed that.

But how does being more highly valued by so-
ciety make you a more worthwhile person?

I’m earning a huge salary. I’m worth millions.
Just how much are you worth, Mr. School-
teacher?

You clearly have more financial worth. But how
does that make you a more worthwhile human
being? How does commercial success make you
a better person?

Dave, if you’re not going to worship me, I’m
not going to talk to you.

Well, I don’t see how that would make me less
worthwhile either. Unless you have the idea that
you re going to go around deciding who’s worth-
while based on who worships you!

Of course I do!

Does that go along with being editor of Cos-
mopolitan? If so, please tell me how you make
these decisions. If I’m not worthwhile, I’d def-
initely like to know why so that I can give up
feeling good and considering myself equal to
other people.

338 David D. Burns, M.D.

YOu:

DAVID:

YOu:

DAVID:

YOU:

DAVID:

Well, it must be that your orbit is rather small
and dreary. While I’m on my Lear jet to Paris,
you're in a crowded school bus going to She-
boygan.

My orbit may be small, but it’s very gratifying.
I enjoy the teaching. I enjoy the kids. I like to
see them develop. I like to see them learn. At
times they make mistakes, and I have to let them
know. There’s a lot of real love and humanity
that goes on there. A lot of drama. What about
that seems dreary to you?

Well, there’s not as much to learn. No real chal-
lenge. It seems to me that in a world as small as
yours you learn just about everything there is to
learn, and then you just repeat things over and
over.

Your work presents quite a challenge as it turns
out. How could I know everything there is to
know about even one student? They all seem
complex and exciting to me. I don’t think I have
anybody figured out completely. Do you? Work-
ing with even one student is a complex challenge
to all my abilities. Having so many young people
to work with ts a challenge beyond what I could
ask for. I don’t understand what you mean when
you say my world ts small and boring and every-
thing is figured out.

Well, it just seems to me that you are unlikely
to run into many people in your world who are
going to develop as highly as I have.

I don’t know. Some of my students have high
IQ’s and may develop the same way you did,
and some of them are mentally subnormal and
will only develop to a modest level. Most are
average and each one is fascinating to me. What
did you mean when you said they were boring?

FEELING GOOD 339

Why is it that only the great achievers are inter-
esting to you?
You: I! give in! Uncle!

I hope you did in fact ‘‘give in’? when you played the
role of the successful snob. The method I used to thwart
your claim you were better than I was quite simple. When-
ever you claimed you were a better or more worthy person
because of some specific quality such as intelligence, influ-
ence, status, or whatever, I immediately agreed with you
that you are better in that particular quality (or set of qual-
ities) and then I asked you——‘‘But how does that make you
a better (or more worthwhile) person?’’ This question can-
not be answered. It will take the wind out of the sails of
any system of values that sets some people up as being
superior to others.

The technical name for this method is ‘‘operationaliza-
tion.’’ In it you must spell out just what quality makes
anyone more or less worthwhile than anyone else. You can’t
do it!

Of course, other people would rarely think or say such
insulting things to you as were said in the dialogues. The
real put-down goes on in your head. You are the one who’s
telling yourself your lack of status, or achievement, or pop-
ularity, or love, etc., makes you less worthwhile and de-
sirable; so you’re the one who’s going to have to put an
end to the persecution. You can do this in the following
way: Carry on a similar dialogue with yourself. Your im-
aginary Opponent, who we’ll name the Persecutor, will try
to argue that you are inherently inferior or less worthwhile
because of some imperfection or lack. You simply asser-
tively agree with the grain of truth in his criticism, but raise
the question of how it follows that you are less worthwhile.
Here are several examples:

|. Persecutor: You’re not a very good lover. Sometimes
you don’t even get a firm erection. This means you’re
less of a man and an inferior person.

340 David D. Burns, M.D.

You: It certainly shows that I’m nervous about sex
and not a particularly skilled or confident lover. But
how does this make me less of a man or less of a
person? Since only a man can feel nervous about an
erection, this would seem to be an especially
‘‘manly’’ experience; doing it well makes you more
of a man! Furthermore, there’s a great deal more to
being a man than just having sex.

2. Persecutor: You’re not as hardworking or as success-
ful as most of your friends. You’re lazy and no good.
You: This means I’m less ambitious and hardworking.
I may even be less talented, but how does it follow
that I’m ‘‘lazy and no good’’?

3. Persecutor: You’re not worth much because you’re
not outstanding in anything.
You: I agree that I don’t hold a single world cham-
pionship. I’m not even second best at anything. In
fact, at most things I’m pretty much average. How
does it follow that ’m not worth much?

4. Persecutor: You’re not popular, you don’t even have

many close friends, and no one cares about you much.
You have no family and not even any casual lovers.
So you’re a loser. You’re an inadequate person.
There’s obviously something wrong with you. You’re
worthless.
You: It’s true I have no lover at this time, and there
are just a few friends I feel close to. How many do I
need to be an ‘‘adequate person’’? Four? Eleven? If
I’m not popular, it may be that [’m relatively un-
skilled socially, and I may have to work harder at this.
But how does it follow that I’m a “‘loser’’? Why am
I worthless?

I suggest you try out the method illustrated above. Write
down the worst persecutory insults you can level at yourself
and then answer them. It may be hard at first, but eventually
the truth will dawn on you—you can be imperfect or un-

FEELING GOOD 341

successful or unloved by others, but not one iota less worth-
while.

Four Paths to Self-Esteem

You might ask, *“How can I attain self-esteem if my worth
doesn’t come from my success or from love or approval?
If you peel all these criteria away one by one and expose
them as invalid bases for personal worth, it seems there will
be nothing left. Just what is tt that I have to do?’’ Here are
four valid paths to self-esteem. Choose the one that seems
most useful to you.

The first path is both pragmatic and philosophical. Es-
sentially, you must acknowledge that human ‘‘worth’’ 1s
just an abstraction; it doesn’t exist. Hence, there is actually
no such thing as human worth. Therefore, you cannot have
it or fail to have it, and it cannot be measured. Worth ts
not a “‘thing,’’ it is just a global concept. It is so generalized
it has no concrete practical meaning. Nor is it a useful and
enhancing concept. It is simply self-defeating. It doesn’t do
you any good. It only causes suffering and misery. So rid
yourself immediately of any claim to being ‘‘worthy,’’ and
you'll never have to measure up again or fear being **worth-
less.”’

Realize that ‘‘worthy’’ and ‘‘worthless’’ are just empty
concepts when applied to a human being. Like the concept
of your ‘‘true self,’’ your ‘‘personal worth’’ is just mean-
ingless hot air. Dump your ‘‘worth’’ in the garbage can!
(You can put your ‘‘true self’’ in there too, if you like.)
You'll find you’ve got nothing to lose! Then you can focus
on living in the here and now instead. What problems do
you face in life? How will you deal with them? That’ s where
the action is, not in the elusive mirage of ‘‘worth.’’

You may be afraid to give up your “‘‘self’’ or your
‘‘worth.’’ What are you afraid of? What terrible thing will
happen? Nothing! The following imaginary dialogue may
make this clearer. Let’s assume that I am worthless. | want
you to rub it in and try to make me feel upset.

342 David D. Burns, M.D.

YOu:
DAVID:

You:

DAVID:

YOu:

DAVID:

YOu:

DAVID:

Bums, you’re worthless!

Of course I’m worthless. I fully agree. I realize
that there is nothing about me that makes me
‘“‘worthy.’’ Love, approval, and achievement
can’t give me any ‘‘worth,’’ so I'll accept the
fact that / have none! Should this be a problem
for me? Is something bad going to happen now?

Well, you must be miserable. You’re just ‘“‘no
good.”’

Assuming I am ‘‘no good,’’ so what? What spe-
cifically do I have to be miserable about? Does
being ‘‘worthless’’ put me at a disadvantage in
some way?

Well, how can you respect yourself? How could
anyone? You’re just a scum!

You may think I’m a scum, but I do respect
myself, and so do lots of other people. I see no
valid reason not to respect myself. You may not
respect me, but I don’t see that as a problem.

But worthless people can’t be happy or have any
fun. You’re supposed to be depressed and de-
spicable. My panel of experts met and deter-
mined that you’re a total zero.

So, call the papers and let them know. I can see
the headline: ‘*Philadelphia Physician Found to
Be Worthless.”’ If I'm really that bad off, it’s
reassuring because now I have nothing to lose.
I can live my life fearlessly. Furthermore, I am
happy and I am having fun, so being a “‘total
zero’’ can’t be bad. My motto is —‘‘Worthless
is Wonderful!’’ In fact, ?'m thinking of having
a T-shirt made up like that. Perhaps I’m missing
out on something, though. Apparently you’re
worthwhile, whereas I’m not. What good does
this ‘‘worth’’? do you? Does it make you better
than people like me, or what?

FEELING GOOD 343

The question may occur to you—‘‘If I gave up my belief
that success adds to my personal worth, then what would
be the point in doing anything?’’ If you stay in bed all day,
the probability that you will bump into something or some-
one that will make your day a little brighter is very small.
Furthermore, there can be enormous satisfactions from daily
living that are totally independent of any concept of personal
worth. For example, as I am writing this I feel very turned
on, but it isn’t due to my belief that I am particularly “‘worth-
while’’ because I’m writing it. The exhilaration comes from
the creative process, pulling ideas together, editing, watch-
ing clumsy sentences sharpen up, and wondering how you
will react when you read this. This process is an exciting
adventure. Involvement, commitment, and taking a risk can
be quite stimulating. This is an adequate payoff, to my way
of thinking.

You might also wonder—‘‘What is the purpose and
meaning of life without a concept of worth?’’ It’s simple.
Rather than grasp for ‘‘worth,’’ aim for satisfaction, plea-
sure, learning, mastery, personal growth and communica-
tion with others every day of your life. Set realistic goals
for yourself and work toward them. I think you will find
this so abundantly gratifying you'll forget all about
‘‘worth,’’ which in the last analysis has no more buying
power than fool’s gold.

‘‘But I’m a humanistic or spiritual person,’’ you might
argue. ‘‘I’ve always been taught that a// human beings have
worth, and I just don’t want to give up this concept.’’ Very
well, if you want to look at it that way, Pll agree with you,
and this brings us to the second path to self-esteem. Ac-
knowledge that everyone has one ‘‘unit of worth’’ from the
time they are born until the time they die. As an infant you
may achieve very little, and yet you are still precious and
worthwhile. And when you are old or ill, relaxed or asleep,
or just doing ‘‘nothing,’’ you still have “‘worth.’’ Your
‘‘unit of worth’’ can’t be measured and can never change,
and it is the same for everyone. During your lifetime, you
can enhance your happiness and satisfaction through pro-

344 David D. Burns, M.D.

ductive living, or you can act in a destructive manner and
make yourself miserable. But your “‘unit of worth’’ is al-
ways there, along with your potential for self-esteem and
joy. Since you can’t measure it or change it, there is no
point in dealing with it or being concerned about it. Leave
that up to God.

Paradoxically, this solution comes down to the same bot-
tom line as the previous solution. It becomes pointless and
irresponsible to deal with your ‘‘worth,’’ so you might as
well focus on living life productively instead! What prob-
lems do you confront today? How will you go about solving
them? Questions such as these are meaningful and useful,
whereas rumination about your personal ‘‘worth’’ just
causes you to spin your wheels.

Here is the third path to self-esteem: Recognize that there
is only one way you can lose a sense of self-worth—by
persecuting yourself with unreasonable, illogical negative
thoughts. Self-esteem can be defined as the state that exists
when you are not arbitrarily haranguing and abusing yourself
but choose to fight back against those automatic thoughts
with meaningful rational responses. When you do this ef-
fectively, you will experience a natural sense of jubilation
and self-endorsement. Essentially, you don’t have to get the
river flowing, you just have to avoid damming it.

Since only distortion can rob you of self-esteem, this
means that nothing in “‘reality’’ can take away your sense
of worth. As evidence for this, many individuals under
conditions of extreme and realistic deprivation do not ex-
perience a loss of self-esteem. Indeed, some individuals who
were imprisoned by the Nazis during World War II refused
to belittle themselves or buy into the persecutions of their
captors. They reported an actual enhancement of self-esteem
in spite of the miseries they were subjected to, and in some
cases described experiences of spiritual awakening.

Here is the fourth solution: Self-esteem can be viewed as
your decision to treat yourself like a beloved friend. Imagine
that some VIP you respect came unexpectedly to visit you
one day. How might you treat that person? You would wear

FEELING GOOD 345

your best clothes and offer your finest wine and food, and
you would do everything you could to make him feel com-
fortable and pleased with his visit. You would be sure to
let him know how highly you valued him, and how honored
you were that he chose to spend some time with you. Now—
why not treat yourself like that? Do it all the time if you
can! After all, in the final analysis, no matter how impressed
you are with your favorite VIP, you are more important to
you than he is. So why not treat yourself at least as well?
Would you insult and harangue such a guest with vicious,
distorted put-downs? Would you peck away at his weak-
nesses and imperfections? Then why do this to yourself?
Your self-torment becomes pretty silly when you look at it
this way.

Do you have to earn the right to treat yourself in this
loving, caring way? No, this attitude of self-esteem will be
an assertion that you make, based on a full awareness and
acceptance of your strengths and imperfections. You will
fully acknowledge your positive attributes without false hu-
mility or a sense of superiority, and will freely admit to all
your errors and inadequacies without any sense of inferiority
or self-depreciation whatever. This attitude embodies the
essence of self-love and self-respect. It does not have to be
earned, and it cannot be earned in any way.

Escape from the Achievement Trap

You might be thinking, “‘AIl that philosophizing about
achievement and self-worth is well and good. After all, Dr.
Burns has a good career and a book on the market, so it’s
easy for him to tell me to forget about achievement. It sounds
about as genuine as a rich man trying to explain to a beggar
that money isn’t important. The raw fact is, I still feel bad
about myself when I do poorly, and I believe that life would
be a whole lot more exciting and meaningful if | had more
success. The truly happy people are the big shots, the ex-
ecutives. I’m only average. I’ve never done anything really

346 David D. Burns, M.D.

outstanding, so I’m bound to be less happy and satisfied.
If this isn’t right, then prove it to me! Show me what I can
do to change the way I feel, and only then will I be a true
believer.’’

Let’s review several steps you might take to liberate your-
self from the trap of feeling you must perform in an out-
standing manner in order to earn your right to feel
worthwhile and happy.

Remember to Talk Back. The first useful method is to
keep practicing the habit of talking back to those negative,
distorted thoughts which cause you to feel inadequate. This
will help you realize that the problem is not your actual
performance, but the critical way in which you put yourself
down. As you learn to evaluate what you do realistical-
ly, you will experience increased satisfaction and self-
acceptance.

Here’s how it worked for Len, a young man pursuing a
career playing the guitar in rock bands. He sought treatment
because he felt like a ‘‘second-rate’’ musician. From the
time he was young, he was convinced he had to be a “‘ge-
nius’’ in order to be appreciated. He was easily hurt by
criticism, and often made himself miserable by comparing
himself with better-known musicians. He would feel de-
flated when he told himself, ‘‘I’m a nobody in comparison
with X.’’ He was certain that his friends and fans also
viewed him as a mediocre person, and he concluded that
he could never receive his fair share of the good things in
life: praise, admiration, love, etc.

Len utilized the double-column technique to expose the
nonsense and illogic in what he was saying to himself (Fig-
ure 13-1). This helped him to see that it was not a lack of
musical talent that was the cause of his problems, but his
unrealistic thinking patterns. As he began to correct this
distorted thinking, his self-confidence improved. He de-
scribed the effect of this: ‘‘Writing down my thoughts and
answering them helped me to see how hard I was being on

FEELING GOOD 347

Figure 13-1. Len’s homework form for recording and answering
his upsetting thoughts about being “the greatest.”

Automatic Thoughts Rational Responses

| |. If ’'m not ‘‘the greatest,’’ 1 (All-or-nothing thinking). Whether

it means I won't get any
attention from people.

. But everybody doesn’t like
the kind of music I play.

. But how can / enjoy my
music if [ know I’m not
‘‘the greatest’’?

. But tf 1 were more famous
and talented, then I’d have
more fans. How can I be
happy on the sidelines
when the big-name per-
formers with charisma are
in the spothght?

. But I feel that no girl could
really love me until I be-
come a big-name talent.

or not I’m ‘‘the greatest,’ people
wil listen to me, they will see me
perform, and many will respond
positively to my music.

. This is true of all musicians, even

Beethoven or Bob Dylan. No mu-
sician can please everybody. Quite
a few people do respond to my mu-
sic. If | enjoy my music, then that
should be enough.

. By playing music that tums me on,

just as I always have! Besides,
there’s no such thing as ‘‘the

world’s greatest musician '’ So stop
trying to be it!

. How many fans and how many gir!

friends do | need before F'll be
happy?

. Other people are loved who are just
‘‘average’’ in their work. Do | really
have to be a big shot before someone
will love me? Many of the guys |
know get plenty of dates and they're
not so unusual.

myself, and it gave me a sense there was something I could
do to change. Instead of sitting there getting bombed by
what I was telling myself, I suddenly had some antiaircraft
artillery to fight back with.”’

348 David D. Burns, M.D.

Tune In to What Turns You On. One assumption which
might be driving you to constant preoccupation with
achievement is the idea that true happiness comes only
through success in your career. This is unrealistic because
the majority of life’s satisfactions do not require great
achievement at all. It takes no special talent to enjoy an
average walk through the woods on an autumn day. You
don’t have to be ‘‘outstanding’’ to relish the affectionate
hug of your young son. You can enjoy a good game of
volley ball tremendously even though you’ re just an average
player. What are some of life’s pleasures that have turned
you on? Music? Hiking? Swimming? Food? Travel? Con-
versation? Reading? Learning? Sports? Sex? You don’t have
to be famous or a top performer to enjoy these to the hilt.
Here’s how you can turn up the volume so that this kind of
music comes in loud and clear.

Josh is a fifty-eight-year-old man with a history of de-
structive, manic mood swings as well as incapacitating
depressions. When he was a child, Josh’s parents empha-
sized over and over that his career was destined to be ex-
traordinary, so he always felt he had to be number one. He
eventually did make an exceptional! contribution in his cho-
sen field, electrical engineering. He won numerous awards,
was appointed to presidential commissions, and was cred-
ited with many patents. However, as his cyclic mood dis-
order became increasingly severe, Josh began to have
‘‘high’’ episodes. During these periods, his judgment be-
came grossly impaired and his behavior was so bizarre and
disruptive that he had to be hospitalized on several occa-
sions. Sadly, he came down off one high to learn he had
lost his family as well as his prestigious career. His wife
had filed for divorce, and he had been forced into an early
retirement by the company he worked for. Twenty years of
achievement went down the drain.

In the years that followed, Josh was treated with lithium
and developed a modest consulting business. Eventually he
was referred to me for treatment because he still experienced

FEELING GOOD 349

uncomfortable mood swings, especially depression, in spite
of the lithium.

The crux of his depression was clear-cut. He was dis-
couraged about his life because his career no longer mea-
sured up in terms of the money and prestige he had
experienced in the past. While he had enjoyed the role of
charismatic ‘‘charger’’ as a young man, he was now ap-
proaching sixty and felt alone and ‘‘over the hill.’’ Because
he still believed the only way to true happiness and personal
worth was through superlative, creative achievements, he
felt certain that his constricted career and modest life-style
made him second-rate.

Since he was still a good scientist at heart, Josh decided
to test his hypothesis that his life was destined to be mediocre
by using the Pleasure-Predicting Sheet (described in pre-
vious chapters). Each day he agreed to schedule various
activities that might give him a sense of pleasure, satisfac-
tion, or personal growth. These activities could be related
to his consulting business as well as hobbies and recreational
pursuits. Before each activity he was to write down his
prediction of how enjoyable it would be and mark it between
QO percent (no satisfaction at all) and 99 percent (the max-
imum enjoyment a human being can experience).

After filling out these forms for several days, Josh was
surprised to find that life had just as much potential for joy
and satisfaction as it ever had (see Figure 13-2). His dis-
covery that work was at times quite rewarding and that
numerous other activities could be just as enjoyable, if not
more so, was a revelation to him. He was amazed one
Saturday night when he went roller-skating with his girl
friend. As they moved to the music, Josh found he began
to tune into the beat and the melody, and as he became
absorbed in the rhythm, he experienced a great sense of
exhilaration. The data he collected on the Pleasure-
Predicting Sheet indicated he didn’t need a trip to Stockholm
to receive the Nobel Prize to experience the ultimate in
satisfaction—he didn’t have to go any farther than the skat-

i%66 puony [18 suneys-Jay[oY | 66/07/P
Jowroisnd Tenusjod

(SSouIsng MOU OU) %Op Jjas | @ UO , [fed AJeUOISSIU,, & OxVW | 66/61/P

%OS yjas yodal uayM atedaig | 66/61/P

%SB Jjas | ysesyvorq aojoq Ye SUoT oxBL | 66/61 /r

WSL Jyas yoofoid SuNTNsuUOD UO YIOM | 66/81/r

(Ananoy ays (Ajay ay) (f1as froads UOLIDISHDG 10 aod
IOV SIy[ p4ozay) wojag s1y4J p4102ay) ‘auojpy fT) ainsvald sof ky1ayoy

'(%00I-0) (%00I-0) CUM SIYL O”
UONID{SIIDS JONIIY UuoTjID{SIDS pajaipasd | NOX pig OYM

‘yooys Sunoipeig-eimsee[g oy "e-E, sunbry


FEELING GOOD 351

ing rink! His experiment proved that life was still filled with
abundant opportunities for pleasure and fulfillment if he
would enlarge his mental focus from a microscopic fixation
on work and open himself up to the broad range of rich
experiences that living can offer.

I am not arguing that success and achievement are un-
desirable. That would be unrealistic. Being productive and
doing well can be enormously satisfying and enjoyable.
However, it is neither necessary nor sufficient to be a great
achiever in order to be maximally happy. You don’t have
to earn love or respect on the treadmill, and you don’t have
to be number one before you can feel fulfilled and know
the meaning of inner peace and self-esteem. Now doesn’t
that make good sense?

Chapter 14

Dare to Be Average!—
Ways to Overcome Perfectionism

I dare you to try to be ‘‘average.’’ Does the prospect seem
blah and boring? Very well—I dare you to try it for just
one day. Will you accept the challenge? If you agree, |
predict two things will happen. First, you won’t be partic-
ularly successful at being ‘‘average.’’ Second, in spite of
this you will receive substantial satisfaction from what you
do. More than usual. And if you try to keep this ‘‘aver-
ageness’’ up, I suspect your satisfaction will magnify and
turn to joy. That’s what this chapter is all about—learning
to defeat perfectionism and enjoy the spoils of pure joy.

Think of it this way—there are two doors to enlighten-
ment. One is marked ‘‘Perfection,’’ and the other is marked
‘‘Average.’’ The ‘‘Perfection’’ door is orate, fancy, and
seductive. [t tempts you. You want very much to go through.
The ‘‘Average’’ door seems drab and plain. Ugh! Who
wants it?

So you try to go through the ‘‘Perfection’’ door and
always discover a brick wall on the other side. As you insist
on trying to break through, you only end up with a sore
nose and a headache. On the other side of the ‘‘Average’’
door, in contrast, there’s a magic garden. But it may never
have occurred to you to open this door to take a look!

352

FEELING GOOD 353

You don’t believe me? I didn’t think so, and you don’t
have to. I want you to maintain your skepticism! It’s
healthy—but at the same time I dare you to check me out.
Prove me wrong! Put my claim to the test. Walk through
that “‘Average’’ door just one day in your life. You may
end up amazed!

Let me explain why. ‘‘Perfection’’ is man’s ultimate il-
lusion. It simply doesn’t exist in the universe. There is no
perfection. It’s really the world’s greatest con game; it prom-
ises riches and delivers misery. The harder you strive for
perfection, the worse your disappointment will become be-
cause it’s only an abstraction, a concept that doesn’t fit
reality. Everything can be improved if you look at it closely
and critically enough—every person, every idea, every work
of art, every experience, everything. So if you are a per-
fectionist, you are guaranteed to be a loser in whatever you
do.

‘*Averageness’’ is another kind of illusion, but it’s a
benign deception, a useful construct. It’s like a slot machine
that pays a dollar fifty for every dollar you pyt in. It makes
you rich—on all levels.

If you’re willing to explore this bizarre-sounding hy-
pothesis, let’s begin. But beware—don’t let yourself be-
come too average because you may not be used to so much
euphoria. After all, a lion can eat only so much meat after
the kill!

Do you remember Jennifer, the perfectionistic writer-
student mentioned in Chapter 4? She complained that friends
and psychotherapists kept telling her to stop being such a
perfectionist, but no one ever bothered to tell her how to
go about doing this. This chapter is dedicated to Jennifer.
She’s not the only one who feels in a quandry about this.
At my lectures and workshops, psychotherapists have often
asked me to prepare a how-to-do-it manual that illustrates
the fifteen techniques I have developed for overcoming per-
fectionism. Well—here’s the manual. These methods work.
You have nothing to fear or lose because the effects are not
irreversible.

354 David D. Burns, M.D.

1. The best place to begin your fight against perfection-
ism is with your motivation for maintaining this approach.
Make a list of the advantages and disadvantages of being
perfectionistic. You may be surprised to learn that it is not
actually to your advantage. Once you understand that it does
not in fact help you in any way, you’ll be much more likely
to give it up.

Jennifer’s list is shown in Figure 14—1. She concluded
that her perfectionism was clearly not to her advantage.
Now make your list. After you have completed it, read on.

2. Using your list of the advantages and disadvantages
of perfectionism, you might want to do some experiments
to test some of your assumptions about the advantages. Like
many people, you may believe ‘‘Without my perfectionism
I'd be nothing. I couldn’t perform effectively.’’ I'll bet you
never put this hypothesis to the test because your belief in
your inadequacy ts such an automatic habit it has never even
occurred to you to question it. Did you ever think that maybe
you’ve been as successful as you are in spite of your per-
fectionism and not because of it! Here’s an experiment that
will allow you to come to the truth of the matter. Try altering
your standards in various activities so you can see how your
performance responds to high standards, middle standards,
and low standards. The results may surprise you. I’ve done
this with my writing, my psychotherapy with patients, and
my jogging. And in all cases I have been pleasantly shocked
to discover that by /owering my standards not only do I feel
better about what I do but I tend to do it more effectively.

For example, | began jogging in January 1979 for the
first time in my life. I live in a very hilly region, and initially
I couldn’t run more than two or three hundred yards without
having to stop and walk because there are hills tn all di-
rections from my driveway. Each day I made it my aim to
run a little less far than the day before. The effect of this
was that I could always accomplish my goal easily. Then
I would feel so good it would spur me on farther—and every
step was gravy, more than I had aimed for. Over a period
of months I built up to the point at which I could run seven

Figure 14—1. Jennifer's list of advantages and disadvantages of
perfectionism. She concluded, “Clearly the disadvantages out-
weigh the one possible advantage.”

Advantages of
Perfectionism

1. It can produce fine 1.
work. I’ll try hard to
come up with an ex-
ceptional result.

Disadvantages

It makes me so “‘tight’’ and ner-
vous I can’t produce fine work.

. I become afraid and unwilling to

risk the mistakes necessary to
come up with a fine product.

. It makes me very critical of my-

self. I can’t enjoy life because |
can’t admit my successes or allow
myself to revel in them.

. | can’t ever relax because I'll al-

ways be able to find something
somewhere that isn’t perfect, and
then I'll get self-critical.

. Since I can never be perfect, I'll

always be depressed.

. It makes me intolerant of others.

I end up without many friends be-
cause people don’t appreciate
being criticized. I find so many
faults in people I lose my capacity
to feel warm and to like them.

. Another disadvantage is that my

perfectionism keeps me _ from
trying new things and making dis-
coveries. I’m so afraid of making
mistakes that I don’t do much at
all besides the same familiar
things I’m good at. The result 1s
that it narrows my world and
makes me bored and restless be-
cause | have no new challenges.

356 David D. Burns, M.D.

miles over a steep terrain at a fairly rapid pace. I have never
abandoned my basic principles—to try to accomplish less
than the day before. Because of this rule I never feel frus-
trated or disappointed in my running. There have been many
days when due to sickness or fatigue, I actually didn’t run
far or fast. Today, for example, I could only run a quarter
mile because I had a cold and my lungs said NO FARTHER!
So I told myself, ‘‘This ts as far as I was supposed to go.”’
I felt good because I achieved my goal.

Try this. Choose any activity, and instead of aiming for
100 percent, try for 80 percent, 60 percent, or 40 percent.
Then see how much you enjoy the activity and how pro-
ductive you become. Dare to aim at being average! It takes
courage, but you may amaze yourself!

3. If you are a compulsive perfectionist you may believe
that without aiming for perfection you couldn’t enjoy life
to the maximum or find true happiness. You can put this
notion to the test by using the Antiperfectionism Sheet (Fig-
ure 14—2). Record the actual amount of satisfaction you get
from a wide range of activities, such as brushing your teeth,
eating an apple, walking in the woods, mowing the lawn,
sunbathing, writing a report for work, etc. Now estimate
how perfectly you did each activity between 0 and 100
percent, as well as marking how satisfying each was between
0 and 100 percent. This will help you break the illusory
connection between perfection and satisfaction.

Here’s how it works. In Chapter 4 I referred to a physician
who was convinced he had to be perfect at all times. No
matter how much he accomplished he would always raise
his standards slightly higher, and then he’d feel miserable.
I told him he was the Philadelphia all-or-nothing thinking
champion! He agreed but protested he didn’t know how to
change. I persuaded him to do some research on his moods
and accomplishments, using the Antiperfectionism Sheet.
One weekend he did some plumbing at home because a pipe
broke and flooded the kitchen. He was a novice plumber,
but did manage to fix the leak and clean up the mess. On
the sheet he recorded this as 99 percent satisfaction (see

FEELING GOOD 357

Figure 14—2. The Antiperfectionism Sheet.

Record How

Effectively You Did

This Between 0%

Record How
Satisfying This
Was Between 0%
and 100%

Activity and 100%

Fix broken pipe in
kitchen

20% (I took a long 99% (I actually did
time and made a lot it!)

of mistakes. )
98% (1 got a
Standing ovation.)

Give lecture to
medical school
class

50% (I usually get
a standing ovation.
I wasn’t particu-
larly thrilled with
my performance. )

95% (Really felt
good. Enjoyed the
game and the exer-
cise.)

15% (I kept telling
myself it wasn't
the definitive paper
and felt quite frus-
trated.)

90% (He really
seemed to appreci-
ate our talk, so I
felt turned on.)

60% (I lost the
match but played
Okay.)

Play tennis after
work

75% (I stuck with
it and corrected
many errors, and
smoothed out the
sentences. )

50% (I didn’t do
anything special. I
just listened to him
and offered a few
obvious sugges-
tions.)

Edit draft of my
latest paper for one
hour

Talk to student
about his career
options

Figure 14—2). Since it was the first time he’d ever tried to
fix a pipe, he recorded his expertise as only 20 percent. He
got the job done, but it was time-consuming and required
considerable guidance from a neighbor. In contrast, he re-
ceived low degrees of satisfaction from some activities he
did an outstanding job on.

This experience with the Antiperfectionism Sheet per-
suaded him that he did not have to be perfect at something
to enjoy it, and, furthermore, that striving for perfection

358 David D. Burns, M.D.

and performing exceptionally did not guarantee happiness,
but indeed tended to be associated more frequently with less
satisfaction. He concluded he could either give up his com-
pulsive drive for perfection and settle for joyous living and
high productivity, or make his happiness of secondary tm-
portance and constantly push for greatness, and settle for
emotional anguish and modest productivity. Which would
you choose? Try out the Antiperfectionism Sheet and put
yourself to the test.

4. Let’s assume that you’ve decided to give up your
perfectionism at least on a trial basis just to see what hap-
pens. However, you have the lingering notion that you really
could be perfect in at least some areas if you tried hard
enough, and that when you achieve this, something magical
will happen. Let’s take a hard look at whether this goal is
realistic. Does a model of perfection ever really fit reality?
Is there anything you have personally encountered that is
so perfect it could not be improved?

To test this, look around you right now and see how
things could be improved. For example, take someone’s
clothing, a flower arrangement, the color and clarity of a
television picture, the quality of a singer’s voice, the ef-
fectiveness of this chapter, anything at all. I believe you
can always find some way in which something could be
improved. When I first did this exercise, I was riding on a
train. Most things, such as the dirty, rusty old tracks, were
so obviously imperfect I could easily find many ways to
improve them. Then | came to a problem area. A young
black man had his hair in one of those fuzzy naturals. It
looked perfectly smooth and sculptured, and | couldn’t think
of any way it could possibly be improved. I began to panic
and saw my whole antiperfectionist philosophy going down
the drain! Then I suddenly noticed some spots of gray on
his head. I felt instant relief! His hair was imperfect after
all! As I looked more closely, I noticed a few hairs that
were too long and out of place. The closer I examined the
young man, the more uneven hairs I could see—hundreds

FEELING GOOD 359

in fact! This helped convince me that any standard of per-
fection just doesn’t fit reality. So why not give it up? You
are guaranteed to be a sure loser if you maintain a standard
for evaluating your performance that you can’t ever meet.
Why persecute yourself any longer?

5. Another method for overcoming perfectionism in-
volves a confrontation with fear. You may not be aware
that fear always lurks behind perfectionism. Fear is the fuel
that drives your compulsion to polish things to the ultimate.
If you choose to give up your perfectionism, you may in-
itially have to confront this fear. Are you willing? There
is, after all, a payoff in perfectionism—it protects you. It
may protect you from risking criticism, failure, or disap-
proval. If you decide to start doing things less perfectly, at
first you may feel as shaky as if a big California earthquake
were about to hit.

If you don’t appreciate the powerful role that fear plays
in maintaining perfectionistic habits, the exacting behavior
patterns of perfectionistic people can seem incomprehen-
sible or infuriating. There is, for example, a bizarre illness
known as ‘‘compulsive slowness,’’ in which the victim be-
comes so totally bound up with getting things ‘‘just right’’
that simple everyday tasks can become totally consuming.
An attorney with this brutal disorder became preoccupied
with how his hair looked. For hours each day he would
stand before a mirror with a comb and scissors trying to
make adjustments. He became so involved in this, he had
to cut back on his legal practice so he could have more and
more time to work on his hair. Each day his hair got shorter
and shorter because of all his furious clipping. Eventually
it was only an eighth of an inch long all over his head. Then
he became preoccupied with balancing the hairline along
his forehead, and started shaving it to get it ‘‘just right.’’
Each day the hairline receded farther and farther until even-
tually he had shaved his head totally bald! Then he felt a
sense of relief and let it all grow back again, hoping it would
come in ‘‘even.’’ After the hair grew back, he would start

360 David D. Burns, M.D.

clipping it again, and the whole cycle would be repeated.
This ludicrous routine went on for years and left him a
substantially disabled person.

His case may seem extreme but cannot be considered
severe. Far worse forms of the disorder exist. Although the
victims’ strange habits may seem absurd, the effects are
tragic. Like alcoholics, these individuals may sacrifice ca-
reer and family to their miserable compulsions. You too
may be paying heavily for your perfectionism.

What motivates these exacting, overcontrolled individ-
uals? Are they insane? Usually not. What traps them in the
senseless drive for perfection is fear. The moment they try
to stop what they are doing, they are gripped by a powerful
uneasiness that rapidly escalates to raw terror. This drives
them back to their compulsive ritual in a pathetic attempt
to find relief. Getting them to give up their perfectionistic
malignancy is like trying to persuade a man hanging by his
fingers from the edge of a cliff to let go.

You may have noticed compulsive tendencies in yourself
to a much less severe degree. Have you ever pushed re-
lentlessly to look for an important item like a pencil or a
key you misplaced when you knew it was best to forget
about it and wait for it to show up? You do this because
it’s tough to stop. The moment you try, you become uneasy
and nervous. You feel somehow ‘‘not right’’ without the
lost item, as if the whole meaning of your life were in the
balance!

One method of confronting and conquering this fear is
called ‘‘responsé prevention.’’ The basic principle is simple
and obvious. You refuse to give in to the perfectionistic
habit, and you allow yourself to become flooded with fear
and discomfort. Stubbornly stick it out and do not give in
no matter how upset you become. Hang in there and allow
your upset to reach its maximum. After a period of time
the compulsion will begin to diminish until it disappears
completely. At this point—which might require as much as
several hours or as little as ten to fifteen minutes—you have
won! You've defeated your compulsive habit.

FEELING GOOD 36!

Figure 14~—3. The Response-Prevention Form. Record the de-
gree of anxiety and any automatic thoughts every one or two
minutes until you feel completely relaxed. The following experi-
ment was performed by someone who wanted to end a bad habit
of compulsively checking door locks.

Percent of Anxiety
Time or Uneasiness Automatic Thoughts

What if someone steals the
car?
This is ridiculous. Why not

just go and make sure the car
is okay?

Someone may be in it right
now. I can’t stand this!

This is boring. The car will
probably be okay.

Hey—I did it!

Let’s take a simple example. Suppose you are in the habit
of double-checking the house or car locks several times.
Certainly it’s okay to check things once, but more often
than that is redundant and pointless. Drive your car to a
parking lot, lock the doors, and walk away. Now—refuse
to check them! You will feel uneasy. You'll try to persuade
yourself to go back and ‘‘just make sure.”’ DON’T. In-
stead, record your degree of anxiety every minute on the
‘‘Response-Prevention Form’’ (see Figure 14-3) until the
anxiety has vanished. At this point, you win. Often, one
such exposure is sufficient to break a habit permanently, or
you may need numerous exposures as well as a booster shot
from time to time. Many bad habits lend themselves to this
format, including various ‘‘checking rituals’’ (checking to

362 David D. Burns, M.D.

see if the stove is turned off or if the mail has fallen into
the mailbox, etc.), cleaning rituals (compulsive hand-
washing or excessive housecleaning), and others. If you are
ready and willing to break free of these tendencies, I think
you’ ll find the response-prevention technique quite helpful.

6. You may be asking yourself about the origin of the
crazy fear that drives you to compulsive perfectionizing.
You can use the vertical-arrow method described in Chapter
10 to expose the silent assumption that causes your rigid,
tense approach to living. Fred is a college student who was
so preoccupied with getting a term paper ‘“‘just right’’ that
he dropped out of college to work on it for an entire year
to avoid the horrors of turning in a product he wasn’t entirely
Satisfied with. Fred finally enrolled in college again when
he felt ready to turn the paper in, but sought treatment for
his perfectionism because he realized it might take too long
to complete college this way!

He had his confrontation with fear when he was required
to turn in another term paper at the end of his first semester
back in school. This time the professor gave him the ulti-
matum of either turning it in by six P.M. on the due date,
or getting docked one full grade for every day it was late.
Since Fred had an adequate draft of the paper, he realized
it wouldn’t be wise for him to try to polish it and revise it,
so he reluctantly turned it in at 4:55, knowing that there
were a number of uncorrected typographical errors as well
as some sections he wasn’t entirely satisfied with. The mo-
ment he turned it in, his anxiety began to mount. Minute
by minute it increased, and soon Fred was gripped by such
a severe panic attack that he called me at home late in the
evening. He was convinced that something terrible was
about to happen to him because he had turned in an imperfect
paper.

I suggested he use the vertical-arrow method to pinpoint
just what he was so afraid of. His first automatic thought
was, ‘‘I didn’t do an excellent job on the paper.’’ He wrote
this down (see Figure 14—4, page 363), and then asked
himself, ‘‘If that were true, why would it be a problem for

Figure 14—4. Fred used the vertical-arrow method to uncover
the origin of his fears about turning in an “imperfect” paper for a
class. This helped relieve some of the terror he was experiencing.
The question next to each vertical arrow represents what Fred
asked himself in order to uncover the next automatic thought at
a deeper level. By unpeeling the onion in this way, he was able
to expose the silent assumptions which represented the origin
and root of his perfectionism (see text).

Automatic Thoughts Rational Responses

!. I didn’t do an excellent 1. All-or-nothing thinking.

job on the paper.
‘If that were
true, why would
it be a problem
for me?”’

. The professor will notice
all the typos and the weak
sections.
)  ‘‘And why
would that be a
problem?”’

. He’ll feel that I didn’t
care about it.
|  ‘‘Suppose he
does. What
then?”’

. Pl be letting him down.

|  ‘‘If that were
true and he did
feel that way,
why would it be
upsetting to
me?”’

. Pll get a D or an F on the

paper.
{ ‘‘Suppose I
did—what
then?”’

. Emotional

The paper is pretty good
even though it’s not per-
fect.

. Mental filter. He proba-

bly will notice typos, but
he’ll read the whole pa-
per. There are some
fairly good sections.

. Mind reading. I don’t

know that he will think
this. If he did, it wouldn’t
be the end of the world.
A lot of students don’t
care about their papers.
Besides I do care about
it, so if he thought this
he’d be wrong.

. All-or-nothing thinking;

fortune teller error. |
can’t please everyone all
the time. He’s liked most
of my work. If he does
feel disappointed in this
paper he can survive.

reasoning;
fortune teller error. I feel
this way because I’m up-
set. But I can’t predict the
future. I might get a B or
a C, but a D or an F isn’t
very likely.

nameente tnt omar neem

Figure 14—4. cont.

. That

Automatic Thoughts

ademic record.
| ‘*‘And then what
would happen?”’

would mean I!
wasn’t the kind of student
I was supposed to be.

{ ‘*‘Why would
that be upsetting
to me?”’

. People will be angry with

me. Ill be a failure.
"And suppose
they were angry
and I was a fail-
ure? Why would
that be so terri-
ble?”’

Then I would be ostra-
cized and alone.
) ‘And then what?’’

If I’m alone, ?'m bound
to be miserable.

Wield BAA ETT Oita iit IT ence OF FL comin elnrie, none tt

8.

9.

10.

Cen ed

Rational Responses

. That would ruin my ac- 6. ‘All-or-nothing thinking;

fortune teller error. Other
people goof up at times,
and it doesn’t seem to
ruin their lives. Why
can’t I goof up at times?

. Should statement. Who

ever laid down the rule I
was ‘‘supposed’’ to be a
certain way at all times?
Who said I was predes-
tined and morally obliged
to live up to some partic-
ular standard?

The fortune teller error.
If someone is angry with
me, it’s their problem. I
can’t be pleasing people
all the time—it’s too ex-
hausting. It makes my
life a tense, constricted,
rigid mess. Maybe I’d do
better to set my Own stan-
dards and risk someone’s
anger. If I fail at the pa-
per, it certainly doesn’t
make me -‘‘A_ FAIL-
URE.”’

The fortune teller error.
Everyone won't ostracize
me!

Disqualifying —_ positive
data. Some of my hap-
piest times have been
when I’m alone. My
‘“*misery’’ has nothing to
do with being alone, but
comes from the fear of
disapproval and from
persecuting myself for
not living up to perfec-
uionistic standards.

Tete Sim Reenter IR teri at Phe “ROA US ERIE AR ON Nach SAREE RED ep IONS BERLE AAPOR REAR IATA AGI BIS OO ERED 3 A INI aL PDR SE OSA I RIE RNR AAI BRAS RSIS RRS Me ANCE SGA. PH CARON Wid SRT PCH to eter rane IRAN S on AE ER BRE TI are MEMES Eco ale te HAN RETA wr Werte PES as TD HeEAToY

FEELING GOOD 365

me?’’ This question generated the upsetting thought lurking
behind it, as demonstrated in Figure 14—4. Fred wrote down
the next thought that came to mind, and continued to use
the downward-arrow technique to reveal his fears at a deeper
and deeper level. He continued peeling the layers off the
onion in this way until the deepest origin of his panic and
perfectionism was uncovered. This required only a few min-
utes. His silent assumption then became obvious: (1) One
mistake and my career will be ruined. (2) Others demand
perfection and success from me, and will ostracize me if I
fall short.

Once he wrote down his upsetting automatic thoughts,
he was in a position to pinpoint his thinking errors. Three
distortions appeared most often—all-or-nothing thinking,
mind reading, and the fortune teller error. These distor-
tions had trapped him in a rigid, coercive, perfectionistic,
approval-seeking approach to life. Substituting rational re-
sponses helped him recognize how unrealistic his fears were
and took the edge off his panic.

Fred was skeptical, however, because he wasn’t entirely
convinced a catastrophe was not about to strike. He needed
some actual evidence to be convinced. Since he’d been
keeping the elephants away by blowing the trumpet all his
life, he couldn’t be absolutely sure a stampede wouldn’t
occur once he decided to set the trumpet down.

Two days later Fred got the needed evidence: He picked
up his paper, and there was an A— at the top. The typo-
graphical errors had been corrected by the professor, who
wrote a thoughtful note at the end that contained substantial
praise along with some helpful suggestions.

If you are going to let go of your perfectionism, then you
may also have to expose yourself to a certain amount of
initial unpleasantness just as Fred did. This can be your
golden opportunity to learn about the origin of your fears,
using the vertical-arrow technique. Rather than run from
your fear, sit still and confront the bogeyman! Ask yourself,
‘‘What am I afraid of?’’ ‘‘What’s the worst that could hap-
pen?’’ Then write down your automatic thoughts as Fred

366 David D. Burns, M.D.

did, and call their bluff. It will be frightening, but if you
tough it out and endure the discomfort, you will conquer
your fears because they are ultimately based on illusions.
The exhilaration you experience when you make this trans-
formation from worrier to warrior can be the start of a more
confident assertive approach to living.

The thought may have occurred to you—but suppose Fred
did end up with a B, C, D, or an F? What then? In reality,
this usually doesn’t happen because in your perfectionism,
you are in the habit of leaving yourself such an excessively
wide margin of safety that you can usually relax your efforts
considerably without a measurable reduction in the quality
of the actual performance. However, failures can and do
occur in life, and none of us is totally immune. It can be
useful to prepare ahead of time for this possibility so that
you can benefit from the experience. You can do this tf you
set things up in a ‘‘can’t lose’’ fashion.

How can you benefit from an actual failure? [t’s simple!
You remind yourself that your life won’t be destroyed.
Getting a B, in fact, is one of the best things that can happen
to you if you are a straight A student because it will force
you to confront and accept your humanness. This will lead
to personal growth. The real tragedy occurs when a student
is so bright and compulsive that he or she successfully wards
off any chance of failure through overwhelming personal
effort, and ends up graduating with a perfect straight A
average. The paradox in this situation is that success has a
dangerous effect of turning these students into cripples or
slaves whose lives become obsessively rigid attempts to
ward off the fear of being less than perfect. Their careers
are rich in achievement but frequently impoverished in joy.

7. Another method for overcoming perfectionism in-
volves developing a process orientation. This means you
focus on processes rather than outcomes as a basis for eval-
uating things. When I first opened my practice, I had the
feeling [ had to do outstanding work with each patient every
session. I thought my patients and peers expected this of
me, and so I worked my tail off all day long. When a patient

FEELING GOOD 367

indicated he benefited from a session, Id tell myself I was
successful and I’d feel on top of the world. In contrast,
when a patient gave me the runaround or responded neg-
atively to that day’s session, I’d feel miserable and tell my-
self I had failed.

I got tired of the roller-coaster effect and reviewed the
problem with my colleague, Dr. Beck. His comments were
extremely helpful, so I’ll pass them on to you. He suggested
I imagine I had a job driving a car to City Hall each day.
Some days I’d hit mostly green lights and I’'d make fast
time. Other days I’d hit a lot of red lights and traffic jams,
and the trip would take much longer. My driving skill
would be the same each day, so why not feel equally sat-
isfied with the job I did?

He proposed I could facilitate this new way of looking
at things by refusing to try to do an excellent job with any
patient. Instead, I could aim for a good, consistent effort at
each session regardless of how the patient responded, and
in this way I could guarantee 100 percent success forever.

How could you set up process goals as a student? You
could make it your aim to (1) attend lectures; (2) pay at-
tention and take notes; (3) ask appropriate questions; (4)
study each course between classes a certain amount each
day; (5) review class study notes every two or three weeks.
All these processes are within your control, so you can
guarantee success. In contrast, your final grade is not under
your control. It depends on how the professor feels that day,
how well the other students did, where he sets the curve,
etc.

How could you set up process goals if you were applying
for a job? You could (1) dress in a confident, appealing
manner; (2) have your résumé edited by a knowledgeable
friend and typed professionally; (3) give the prospective
employer one or more compliments during the interview;
(4) express an interest in the company and encourage the
interviewer to talk about himself; (5) when the prospective
employer tells you about his work, say something positive,
using an upbeat approach; (6) if the interviewer makes a

368 David D. Burns, M.D.

critical or negative comment about you, immediately agree,
using the disarming technique introduced in Chapter 6.

For example, in my negotiations with a prospective pub-
lisher about this book, I noticed the editor expressed a num-
ber of negative reactions in addition to a few positive ones.
I found the use of the disarming technique worked extremely
well in keeping the waters flowing nonturbulently during
potentially difficult discussions. For example,

EpiTtor X: One of my concerns, Dr. Burns, involves the
emphasis on symptomatic improvement in the
here and now. Aren’t you overlooking the
causes and origins of depressions?

(In the first draft of this book, I had written several chap-
ters on the silent assumptions that give rise to depression,
but apparently the editor was not adequately impressed with
this material or had not read it. I had the option of coun-
terattacking in a defensive manner—which would have only
polarized the editor and made her feel defensive. Instead,
I chose to disarm her in the following way.)

Davip: That’s an excellent suggestion, and you're ab-
solutely right. 1 can see you’ve been doing your
homework on the manuscript, and | appreciate
hearing about your ideas. The readers obviously
would want to learn more about why they get
depressed. This might help them avoid future
depressions. What would you think about ex-
panding the section on silent assumptions and
introducing it with a new chapter we could call
‘*Getting Down to Root Causes’’?

Epitor: That sounds great!

Davip: What other negative reactions do you have to
the book? I’d like to learn as much as I can from
you.

FEELING GOOD 369

I then continued to find a way to agree with each criticism
and to praise Editor X for each and every suggestion. This
was not insincere because I was a greenhorn in popular
writing, and Editor X was a very talented, well-established
individual who was in a position to give me some much-
needed guidance. My negotiating style made it clear to her
that I respected her, and let her know that we would be able
to have a productive working relationship.

Suppose instead that I had been fixed on the outcome
rather than on the negotiating process when the editor in-
terviewed me. I would have been tense and preoccupied
with only one thing—would she or would she not make an
offer for the book? Then I would have seen her every crit-
icism as a danger, and the whole interpersonal process would
have fallen into unpleasant focus.

Thus, when you are applying for work, do not make it
your aim to get the job! Especially if you want the job! The
Outcome depends on numerous factors that are ultimately
out of your control, including the number of applicants,
their qualifications, who knows the boss’s daughter, etc. In
fact, you would do better to try to get as many rejections
as possible for the following reason: Suppose on the average
it takes about ten to fifteen interviews for each acceptable
job offer you receive in your profession (a typical batting
average for people I know who have been recently looking
for work). This means you’ve got to go out and get those
nine to fourteen rejections over with in order to get the job
you want! So each morning say, “‘I’ll try to get as many
rejections as possible today.’’ And each time you do get
rejected you can say, “‘I was successfully rejected. This
brings me one important step closer to my goal.’’

8. Another way to overcome perfectionism involves as-
suming responsibility for your life by setting strict time
limits on all your activities for one week. This will help
you change your perspective so you can focus on the flow
of life and enjoy it.

If you are a perfectionist, you are probably a real pro-

370 David D. Burns, M.D.

crastinator because you insist on doing things so thoroughly.
The secret to happiness is to set modest goals to accomplish
them. If you want misery, then by all means cling to your
perfectionism and procrastination. If you would like to
change, then as you schedule your day in the morning,
decide on the amount of time you will budget on each
activity. Quit at the end of the time you have set aside
whether or not you have completed it, and go onto the next
project. If you play the piano and tend to play for many
hours or not at all, decide instead to play only an hour a
day. I think you’ll enhance your satisfaction and output
substantially this way.

9. PH bet you’re afraid of making mistakes! What’s so
terrible about making mistakes? Will the world come to an
end if you’re wrong? Show me a man who can’t stand to
be wrong, and I’ll show you a man who is afraid to take
risks and has given up the capacity for growth. A particularly
powerful method for defeating perfectionism involves learn-
ing to make mistakes.

Here’s how you can do this. Write an essay in which you
spell out why it is both irrational and self-defeating to try
to be perfect or to fear making mistakes. The following was
written by Jennifer, the student mentioned earlier:

Why It’s Great to Be Able to Make Mistakes

1. I fear making mistakes because I see everything in
absolutist, perfectionistic terms—one mistake and the
whole is ruined. This is erroneous. A small mistake
certainly doesn’t ruin an otherwise fine whole.

2. It’s good to make mistakes because then we learn—
in fact, we won't learn unless we make mistakes. No
one can avoid making mistakes—and since it’s going
to happen in any case, we may as well accept it and
learn from it.

FEELING GOOD 371

3. Recognizing our mistakes helps us to adjust our be-
havior so that we can get results we’re more pleased
with—so we might say that mistakes ultimately op-
erate to make us happier and make things better.

4. If we fear making mistakes, we become paralyzed—
we’re afraid to do or try anything, since we might (in
fact, probably will) make some mistakes. If we restrict
our activities so that we won’t make mistakes, then
we are really defeating ourselves. The more we try
and the more mistakes we make, the faster we’ ll learn
and the happier we’ll be ultimately.

5. Most people aren’t going to be mad at us or dislike
us because we make mistakes—they all make mis-
takes, and most people feel uncomfortable around
‘‘perfect’’ people.

6. We don’t die if we make mistakes.

Although such an essay does not guarantee that you will
change, it can help get you started in the nght direction.
Jennifer reported an enormous improvement the week after
she wrote the essay. She found it useful in her studies to
focus on learning rather than obsessing constantly about
whether or not she was great. As a result, her anxiety de-
creased and her ability to get things done increased. This
relaxed, confident mood persisted through the final exam-
ination period at the end of the first semester—a time of
extreme anxiety for the majority of her classmates. As she
explained, ‘‘I realized I didn’t have to be perfect. I’m going
to make my share of mistakes. So what? I can learn from
my mistakes, so there’s nothing to worry about.’’ And she
was right!

Write a memo to yourself along these lines. Remind your-
self that the world won’t come to an end if you make a
mistake, and point out the potential benefits. Then read the
memo every morning for two weeks. I think this will go a
long way toward helping you join the human race!

372 David D. Burns, M.D.

10. In your perfectionism you are undoubtedly great at
focusing on all the ways you fall short. You have the bad
habit of picking out the things you haven’t done and ignoring
those you have. You spend your dife cataloging every mis-
take and shortcoming. No wonder you feel inadequate! Is
somebody forcing you to do this? Do you like feeling that
way?

Here’s a simple method of reversing this absurd and pain-
ful tendency. Use your wrist counter to click off the things
you do right each day. See how many points you can ac-
cumulate. This may sound so unsophisticated that you are
convinced it couldn’t help you. If so, experiment with it
for two weeks. I predict you’ll discover that you will begin
to focus more on the positives in your life and will con-
sequently feel better about yourself. It sounds simplistic
because it is! But who cares, if it works?

I1. Another helpful method involves exposing the ab-
surdity in the all-or-nothing thinking that gives rise to your
perfectionism. Look around you and ask yourself how many
things in the world can be broken down into all-or-nothing
categories. Are the walls around you totally clean? Or do
they have at least some dirt? Am I totally effective with all
of my writing? Or partially effective? Certainly every single
paragraph of this book isn’t polished to perfection and
breathtakingly helpful. Do you know anyone who is totally
calm and confident al/ the time? Is your favorite movie star
perfectly beautiful?

Once you recognize that all-or-nothing thinking doesn’t
fit reality very often, then look out for your all-or-nothing
thoughts throughout the day, and when you notice one, talk
back to it and shoot it down. You’ll feel better. Some ex-
amples of how a number of different individuals combat all-
or-nothing thoughts appear in Figure 14—5.

12. The next method to combat perfectionism involves
personal disclosure. [f you feel nervous or inadequate in a
situation, then share it with people. Point out the things you
feel you’ve done inadequately instead of covering them up.

Figure 14—5. How to replace all-or-nothing thoughts with others
that are more in tune with reality. These examples were contrib-
uted by a variety of individuals.

All-or-Nothing
Thinking

1. What a lousy day!

2. This meal I cooked
really turned out
terrible.

3. I'm too old.

4. Nobody loves me.

5. 'ma failure.

6. My career is over the
‘hill.

7. My lecture was a
flop!

8. My boyfriend
doesn’t like me!

Realistic Thoughts

. A couple of bad things have hap-

pened, but everything hasn’t been
a disaster.

. It’s not the best meal I ever

cooked, but it’s okay.

. Too old for what? Too old to have

fun? No. Too old for occasional
sex? No. Too old to enjoy friends?
No. Too old to love or be loved?
No. Too old to enjoy music? No.
Too old to do some productive
work? No. So what am I ‘“‘too
old’’ for? It really has no meaning!

. Nonsense. I have many friends

and family. [ may not get as much
love as [ want when I want it, but
I can work on this.

. [ve succeeded at some things and

failed at others, just like every-
body.

. Tcan’t do as much as when [ was

younger, but I can still work and
produce and create, so why not
enjoy it?

. It wasn’t the best lecture I ever

gave. In fact, it was below my
average. But I did get some points
across, and I can work to improve
my next lectures. Remember—
half my lectures will be below my
average, and half will be above!

. He doesn’t like me enough for

what? He may not want to marry
me, but he takes me out on dates,
so he must like me partially.

374 David D. Burns, M.D.

Ask people for suggestions on how to improve, and if
they’re going to reject you for being imperfect, let them do
it and get it over with. If in doubt as to where you stand,
ask if they think less of you when you make a mistake.

If you do this, you must of course be prepared to handle
the possibility that people will look down on you because
of your imperfections. This actually happened to me during
a teaching session I was conducting for a group of therapists.
I pointed out an error I felt I had made in reacting angrily
to a difficult, manipulative patient. I then asked if any of
the therapists present thought less of me after hearing about
my foible. I was taken aback when one replied in the af-
firmative, and the following conversation took place:

THERAPIST (in the audience): I have two thoughts. One
thought is a positive one. | appreciate your
taking that risk to point out your error in
front of the group because I would have been
scared to do it. I think it takes great courage
on your part to do this. But I have to admit
I’m ambivalent about you now. Now I know
that you do make mistakes, which is real-
istic, but. ..1 feel disappointed in you. In
all honesty, I do.

DAVID: Well, I knew how to handle the patient, but
I was so overcome with my anger that I just
got caught up in the moment and retaliated.
I was overly abrupt in the way I reacted to
her. | admit I handled it quite poorly.

THERAPIST: I guess in the context that you see so many
patients each week for so many years, if you
make one blunder like that it’s definitely not
earthshattering. It’s not going to kill her or
anything. But I do feel let down, I have to
admit.

DAVID: But it isn’t just One rare error. I believe that
all therapists make many blunders every sin-

THERAPIST:

DAVID:

THERAPIST:

DAVID:

THERAPIST:

DAVID:

THERAPIST:

FEELING GOOD 375

gle day. Either obvious ones or subtle ones.
At least I do. How will you come to terms
with that? It seems you’re quite disappointed
in me because I didn’t handle that patient
effectively.

Well, I am. I thought you had a sufficiently
wide behavioral repertoire that you could
easily handle nearly anything a patient said
to you.

Well, that’s untrue. I sometimes come up
with very helpful things to say in difficult
situations, but sometimes I’m not as effec-
tive as I’d like to be. I still have a lot to
learn. Now with that knowledge, do you
think less of me?

Yeah. | really do. I have to say that. Because
now I see that there’s a reasonably easy kind
of conflict that can upset you. You were
unable to handle it without showing your
vulnerabilities.

That’s true. At least that time I didn’t handle
it well. It’s an area where I need to focus
my efforts and grow as a therapist.

Well, it shows that at least in that case, and
I assume in others, that you don’t handle
things as well as I thought you did.

I think that’s correct. But the question Is,
why do you think less of me because I am
imperfect? Why are you looking down on
me? Does it make me less a person to you?

You're exaggerating the whole thing now,
and I don’t feel that you are necessarily of
less value as a human or anything like that.
But on the other hand, I think you’re not as
good as a therapist as I thought you were.

376 David D. Burns, M.D.

DAVID:

THERAPIST:
DAVID:

THERAPIST:
DAVID:
THERAPIST:

DAVID:

THERAPIST:

DAVID:

THERAPIST:

DAVID:

That’s true. Do you think less of me because
of that?

As a therapist?

As a therapist or as a person. Do you think
less of me?

Yes, I suppose I do.

Why?

Well, I don’t know how to say this. I think
‘‘therapist’’ is the primary role that [ know
you in. I’m disappointed to find you’re so
imperfect. I had a higher expectation of you.
But perhaps you’re better in other areas of
your life.

I hate to disappoint you, but you’ll discover
that in many other aspects of my life I’m
even more imperfect. So if you’re looking
down on me as a therapist, I presume you'll
look down on me more as a person.

Well, I do think less of you as a person. I
think that’s an accurate description of how
I’m feeling about you.

Why do you think less of me because I don’t
measure up to your standard of perfection?
I’m a human and not a robot.

I’m not sure I understand that question. |
judge people in terms of their performance.
You goofed up, so you have to face the fact
Pll judge you negatively. It’s tough, but it’s
reality. | thought you should perform better
because you’re our preceptor and our
teacher. I expected more of you. Now it
sounds like I could have handled that patient
better than you did!

Well, I think you could have done better than
I did with that patient that day, and this is

FEELING GOOD 377

an area where I think I can learn from you.
But why do you look down on me for this?
If you get disappointed and lose respect each
time you notice I’ve made a mistake, pretty
soon you'll be totally miserable, and you'll
have no respect for me at all because I’ve
been making errors every day since I was
born. Do you want all that discomfort? If
you want to continue and enjoy our friend-
ship, and I hope you will, you'll just have
to accept the fact that I’m not perfect. Maybe
you'd be willing to look for mistakes I make
and point them out to me so I can learn from
you while I’m teaching you. When I stop
making mistakes, I'll lose much of my ca-
pacity to grow. Recognizing and correcting
my errors and learning from them is one
of my greatest assets. And if you can accept
my humanity and imperfection, maybe you
can also accept your own. Maybe you'll
want to feel that it’s okay for you to make
mistakes too.

This kind of dialogue transcends the possibility you will
feel put down. Asserting your right to make mistakes will
paradoxically make you a greater human being. If the other
person feels disappointed, the fault is really his for having
set up the unrealistic expectation you are more than human.
If you don’t buy into that foolish expectation, you won't
have to become angry or defensive when you do goof up—
nor will you have to feel any sense of shame or embar-
rassment. The choice is clear-cut: You can either try to be
perfect and end up miserable, or you can aim to be human
and imperfect and feel enhanced. Which do you choose?
13. The next method is to focus mentally on a time in
your life when you were really happy. What image comes
to mind? For me the image is of climbing down into Ha-
vasupai Canyon one summer vacation when I was a college

378 David D. Burns, M.D.

student. This canyon is an isolated part of the Grand Can-
yon, and you have to hike into it or arrange for horses. I
went with a friend. Havasupai, an Indian word meaning
‘‘blue-green water people,’’ is the name of a turquoise river
that bubbles out of the desert floor and turns the narrow
canyon into a lush paradise many miles long. Ultimately,
the Havasupai River empties into the Colorado River. There
are a number of waterfalls several hundred feet high, and
at the bottom of each, a green chemical in the water pre-
cipitates out and makes the river’s bottom and edges smooth
and polished, just like a turquoise swimming pool. Cotton-
wood trees and Jimsonweed with purple flowers like trum-
pets line the river in abundance. The Indians who live there
are easygoing and friendly. It is a blissful memory. Perhaps
you have a similar happy memory. Now ask yourself—what
was perfect about that experience? In my case, nothing!
There were no toilet facilities, and we slept in sleeping bags
outdoors. I didn’t hike perfectly or swim perfectly, and
nothing was perfect. There was no electricity available in
most of the village because of its remoteness, and the only
available food in the store was canned beans and fruit cock-
tail—no meat or vegetables. But the food tasted darn good
after a day of hiking and swimming. So who needs perfec-
tion?

How can you use such a happy memory? When you are
having a presumably pleasurable experience—eating out,
taking a trip, going to a movie, etc.—you may unnecessarily
sour the experience by making an inventory of all the ways
it falls short and telling yourself you can’t possibly enjoy
it. But this is hogwash—it’s your expectation that upsets
you. Suppose the motel bed is too lumpy and you paid fifty-
six dollars for the room. You called the front desk, and they
have no other beds or rooms available. Tough! Now you
can double your trouble by demanding perfection, or you
can conjure up your “‘happy, imperfect’’ memory. Remem-
ber the time you camped out and slept on the ground and
loved it? So you can certainly enjoy yourself in this motel
room if you choose! Again, it’s up to you.

FEELING GOOD 379

14. Another method for overcoming perfectionism is the
‘‘greed technique.’’ This is based on the simple fact that
most of us try to be perfect so we can get ahead in life. It
may not have occurred to you that you might end up much
more successful if your standards were lower. For example,
when I started my academic career, I spent over two years
writing the first research paper I published. It was an ex-
cellent product, and I’m still quite proud of it. But I noticed
that in the same time period, many of my peers who were
of equal intelligence wrote and published numerous papers.
So I asked myself—am I better off with one publication that
contains ninety-eight ‘‘units of excellence,’’ or ten papers
that are each worth only eighty ‘‘units of excellence’’? In
the latter case, I would actually end up with 800 *‘excellence
units,’’ and I would be way ahead of the game. This re-
alization was a strong personal persuader, and I decided to
lower my standards a bit. My productivity then became
dramatically enhanced, as well as my levels of satisfaction.

How can this work for you? Suppose you have a task and
you notice you’re moving slowly. You may find that you’ve
already reached the point of diminishing returns, and you’d
do better by moving on to the next task. I’m not advocating
that you slough off, but you may find that you as well as
others will be equally if not more pleased with many good,
solid performances than with one stress-producing master-
piece.

15. Here’s the last approach. It involves simple logic.
Premise one: All human beings make mistakes. Do you
agree? Okay, now tell me: What are you? A human being,
you say? Okay. Now, what follows? Of course—you will
and should make mistakes! Now tell yourself this every time
you persecute yourself because you made an error. Just say,
**T was supposed to make that mistake because I’m human!’’
or ‘‘How human of me to have made that mistake.”’

In addition, ask yourself, ‘‘What can I learn from my
mistake? Is there some good that could come from this?’
As an experiment, think about some error you’ ve made and
write down everything you learned from it. Some of the

380 David D. Burns, M.D.

best things can be learned only through making mistakes
and learning from them. After all, this is how you learned
to talk and walk and do just about everything. Would you
be willing to give up that kind of growth? You may even
go so far as to say your imperfections and goof-ups are some
of your greatest assets. Cherish them! Never give up your
capacity for being wrong because then you lose the ability
to move forward. In fact, just think what it would be like
if you were perfect. There’d be nothing to learn, no way to
improve, and life would be completely void of challenge
and the satisfaction that comes from mastering something
that takes effort. It would be like going to kindergarten for
the rest of your life. You’d know all the answers and win
every game. Every project would be a guaranteed success
because you would do everything correctly. People’s con-
versations would offer you nothing because you’d already
know it all. And most important, nobody could love or relate
to you. It would be impossible to feel any love for someone
who was flawless and knew it all. Doesn’t that sound lonely,
boring, and miserable? Are you so sure you still want per-
fection?

Part V

Defeating Hopelessness

and Suicide


Chapter 15

The Ultimate Victory: Choosing to
Live

Dr. Aaron T. Beck reported in a study that suicidal wishes
were present in approximately one-third of individuals with
a mild case of depression, and in nearly three-quarters of
people who were severely depressed.* It has been estimated
that as many as 5 percent of depressed patients do actually
die as a result of suicide. This 1s approximately twenty-five
times the suicide rate within the general population. In fact,
when a person with a depressive illness dies, the chances
are one in six that suicide was the cause of death.

No age group or social or professional class is exempt
from suicide; think of the famous people you know of who
have killed themselves. Particularly shocking and gro-
tesque—but by no means rare—is Suicide among the very
young. In a study of seventh- and eighth-grade students in
a suburban Philadelphia parochial school, nearly one third
of the youngsters were significantly depressed and had su-
icidal thoughts. Even infants who undergo maternal sepa-
ration can develop a depressive syndrome in which failure

*Beck, Aaron T. Depression: Causes and Treatment. Philadelphia: Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania Press, 1972, pp. 30-31.

383

384 David D. Burns, M.D.

to thrive and even self-imposed death from starvation can
result.

Before you get overwhelmed, let me emphasize the pos-
itive side of the coin. First, suicide is unnecessary, and the
impulse can be rapidly overcome and eliminated with cog-
nitive techniques. In our study, suicidal urges were reduced
substantially in patients treated with cognitive therapy or
with antidepressant drugs. The improved outlook on life
occurred within the first week or two of treatment in many
cognitively treated patients. The current intensive emphasis
on the prevention of depressive episodes in individuals prone
to mood swings should also result in a long-term reduction
in suicidal impulses.

Why do depressed individuals so frequently think of su-
icide, and what can be done to prevent these impulses? You
will understand this if you examine the thinking of people
who are actively suicidal. A pervasive, pessimistic vision
dominates their thoughts. Life seems to be nothing but a
hellish nightmare. As they look into the past, all they can
remember are moments of depression and suffering.

When you feel down in the dumps, you may also feel so
low at times that you get the feeling you were never really
happy and never will be. If a friend or relative points out
to you that, except for such periods of depression, you were
quite happy, you may conclude they’re mistaken or only
trying to cheer you up. This is because while you are de-
pressed you actually distort your memories of the past. You
just can’t conjure up any memories of periods of satisfaction
or joy, SO you erroneously conclude they did not exist. Thus,
you mistakenly conclude that you always have been and
always will be miserable. If someone insists that you have
been happy, you may respond as a young patient recently
did in my office, ‘“Well, that period of time doesn’t count.
Happiness is an illusion of some kind. The real me is de-
pressed and inadequate. [ was just fooling myself if ] thought
I was happy.’”’

No matter how bad you feel, it would be bearable if you

FEELING GOOD 385

had the conviction that things would eventually improve.
The critical decision to commit suicide results from your
illogical conviction that your mood can’t improve. You feel
certain that the future holds only more pain and turmoil!
Like some depressed patients, you may be able to support
your pessimistic prediction with a wealth of data which
seems to you to be overwhelmingly convincing.

A depressed forty-nine-year-old stockbroker recently told
me, ‘‘Doctor, I have already been treated by six psychiatrists
over a ten-year-period. I have had shock treatments and all
types of antidepressants, tranquilizers, and other drugs. But
in spite of it all, this depression won’t let up for one minute.
I have spent over eighty thousand dollars trying to get well.
Now I am emotionally and financially depleted. Every doc-
tor has said to me. ‘You'll beat this thing. Keep your chin
up.” But now I realize it wasn’t true. They were all lying
to me. I’m a fighter, so I fought hard. You’d better realize
when you are defeated. I’ve got to admit I’d be better off
dead.”’

Research studies have shown that your unrealistic sense
of hopelessness is one of the most crucial factors in the
development of a serious suicidal wish. Because of your
twisted thinking, you see yourself in a trap from which there
seems to be no escape. You jump to the conclusion that
your problems are insoluble. Because your suffering feels
unbearable and appears unending, you may erroneously con-
clude that suicide is your only way of escape.

If you have had such thoughts in the past, or if you are
seriously thinking this way at present, let me state the mes-
sage of this chapter loud and clear:

You Are Wrong in Your Belief That Suicide Is the
Only Solution or the Best Solution to Your Problem.

Let me repeat that. You Are Wrong! When you think that
you are trapped and hopeless, your thinking is illogical,
distorted, and skewed. No matter how thoroughly you have

386 David D. Burns, M.D.

convinced yourself, and even if you get other people to
agree with you, you are just plain mistaken in your belief
that it is ever advisable to commit suicide because of de-
pressive illness. This is not the most rational solution to
your misery. [ will explain this position and help point the
way out of the suicide trap.

Assessing Your Suicidal impulses

Although suicidal thoughts are common even in individ-
uals who are not depressed, the occurrence of a suicidal
impulse if you are depressed is always to be regarded as a
dangerous symptom. It is important for you to know how
to pinpoint those suicidal impulses which are the most
threatening. In the Burns Depression Checklist in Chapter
2, questions 23, 24, and 25 refer to your suicidal thoughts
and impulses. If you have checked a one, two, three, or
four on these questions, suicidal fantasies are present, and
it is important to evaluate their seriousness and to intervene
if necessary (see page 21).

The most serious error you could make with regard to
your Suicidal impulses is to be overly inhibited in talking
them over with a counselor. Many people are afraid to talk
about suicidal fantasies and urges for fear of disapproval or
because they believe that even talking about them will bring
on a Suicide attempt. This point of view is unwarranted.
You are more likely to feel a great sense of relief in dis-
cussing suicidal thoughts with a professional therapist, and
consequently you have a much better chance of defusing
them.

If you do have suicidal thoughts, ask yourself if you are
taking such thoughts seriously. Are there times when you
wish you were dead? If the answer is yes, is your death
wish active or passive? A passive death wish exists if you
would prefer to be dead, but you are unwilling to take active
steps to bring this about. One young man confessed to me,
‘‘Doctor, every night when I go to bed I pray to God to let

FEELING GOOD 387

me wake up with cancer. Then I could die in peace, and
my family would understand.’’

An active death wish is more dangerous. If you are se-
riously planning an actual suicide attempt, then it’s impor-
tant to know the following: Have you thought about a
method? What is your method? Have you made plans? What
specific preparations have you made? As a general rule, the
more concrete and well-formulated your plans are, the more
likely you may actually make a suicide attempt. The time
to seek professional help is now!

Have you ever made a suicide attempt in the past? If so,
you should view any suicidal impulse as a danger signal to
seek help immediately. For many people these previous
attempts seem to be ‘‘warm-ups,’’ in which they flirt with
suicide but have not mastered the particular method they
have selected. The fact that an individual has made this
attempt unsuccessfully on several occasions in the past in-
dicates an increased risk of success in the future. It is a
dangerous myth that unsuccessful suicide attempts are sim-
ply gestures or attention-getting devices and are therefore
not to be taken seriously. Current thinking suggests that all
suicidal thoughts or actions are to be taken seriously. It can
be highly misleading to view suicidal thoughts and actions
as a “‘plea for help.’’ Many suicidal patients want help least
of all because they are 100 percent convinced they are hope-
less and beyond help. Because of this illogical belief, what
they really want is death.

Your degree of hopelessness ts of the greatest importance
in assessing whether or not you are at risk for making an
active suicide attempt at any time. This one factor seems
more closely linked with actual suicide attempts than any
other. You must ask yourself, ““Do I believe that I have
absolutely no chance of getting better? Do I feel that I have
exhausted all treatment possibilities and that nothing could
possibly help? Do I feel convinced beyond all doubt that
my suffering is unbearable and could never come to an
end?’’ If you answer yes to these questions, then your degree
of hopelessness is high, and professional treatment is in-

388 David D. Burns, M.D.

dicated now! I would like to emphasize that hopelessness
is as much a symptom of depression as a cough is a symptom
of pneumonia. The feeling of hopelessness does not in fact
prove that you are hopeless, any more than a cough proves
you are doomed to succumb to pneumonia. It just proves
that you are suffering from an illness, in this case, depres-
sion. This sense of hopelessness is not a reason to make a
suicide attempt, but gives you a clear signal to seek com-
petent treatment. So, if you feel hopeless, seek help! Do
not consider suicide for one more minute!

The last important factor concerns deterrents. Ask your-
self, “‘Is there anything that is preventing me from com-
mitting suicide? Would I hold back because of my family,
friends, or religious beliefs?’’ If you have no deterrents, the
possibility is greater that you would consider an actual su-
icide attempt.

SUMMARY: If you are suicidal, it is of great importance
for you to evaluate these impulses in a matter-of-fact man-
ner, using your common sense. The following factors put
you in a high-risk group:

|. If you are severely depressed and feel hopeless;

2. If you have a past history of suicide attempts;

3. If you have made concrete plans and preparations for
suicide; and

4. If no deterrents are holding you back.

If one or more of these factors apply to you, then it is vital
to get professional intervention and treatment immediately.
While I firmly believe that the attitude of self-help is im-
portant for all people with depression, you clearly must seek
professional guidance right away.

FEELING GOOD 389
The Illogic of Suicide

Do you think depressed people have the “‘right’’ to com-
mit suicide? Some misguided individuals and novice ther-
apists are unduly concerned with this issue. If you are
counseling or trying to help a chronically depressed indi-
vidual who is hopeless and threatening self-destruction, you
may ask yourself, ‘‘Should I intervene aggressively, or
should I let him go ahead? What are his rights as a human
being in this regard? Am I responsible for preventing this
attempt, or should I tell him to go ahead and exercise his
freedom of choice?”’

I regard this as an absurd and cruel issue that misses the
point entirely. The real question is not whether a depressed
individual has the right to commit suicide, but whether he
is realistic in his thoughts when he is considering it. When
I talk to a suicidal person, I try to find out why he is feeling
that way. I might ask, ‘‘What is your motive for wanting
to kill yourself? What problem in your life is so terrible that
there is no solution?’’ Then I would help that person expose
the illogical thinking that lurks behind the suicidal impulse
as quickly as possible. When you begin to think more real-
istically, your sense of hopelessness and the desire to end
your life will fade away and you will have the urge to live.
Thus, I recommend joy rather than death to suicidal indi-
viduals, and I try to show them how to achieve it as fast as
possible! Let’s see how this can be done.

Holly was a nineteen-year-old woman who was referred
to me for treatment by a child psychoanalyst in New York
City. He had treated her unsuccessfully with analytic therapy
for many years since the onset of a severe unremitting
depression in her early teens. Other doctors had also been
unable to help her. Her depression originated during a period
of family turbulence that led to her parents’ separation and
divorce.

Holly’s chronic blue mood was punctuated by numerous
wrist-slashing episodes. She said that when periods of frus-

390 David D. Burns, M.D.

tration and hopelessness would build up, she would be over-
come by the urge to rip into her flesh and would experience
relief only when she saw the blood flowing across her skin.
When I first met Holly, I noticed a mass of white scar tissue
across her wrists that attested to this behavior. In addition
to these episodes of self-mutilation, which were not suicide
attempts, she had tried to kill herself on a number of oc-
casions.

In spite of all the treatment she had received, her depres-
sion would not let up. At times it became so severe that she
had to be hospitalized. Holly had been confined to a closed
ward of a New York hospital for several months at the time
she was referred to me. The referring doctor recommended
a minimum of three years of additional continuous hospi-
talization, and appeared to agree with Holly that her prog-
nosis for substantial improvement, at least in the near future,
was poor.

Ironically, she was bright, articulate, and personable. She
had done well in high school, in spite of being unable to
go to classes during the times she was confined to hospitals.
She had to take some courses with the help of tutors. Like
a number of adolescent patients, Holly’s dream was to be-
come a mental-health professional, but she had been told
by her previous therapist that this was unrealistic because
of the nature of her own explosive, intractable emotional
problems. This opinion was just one more crushing blow
for Holly.

After graduation from high school, she spent the majority
of her time in inpatient mental-hospital facilities because
she was considered too ill and uncontrollable for outpatient
therapy. In a desperate attempt to find help, her father con-
tacted the University of Pennsylvania because he had read
about our work in depression. He requested a consultation
to determine whether any promising treatment alternatives
existed for his daughter.

After speaking to me by phone, Holly’s father obtained
custody of her and drove to Philadelphia so that I could talk
to her and review the possibilities for treatment. When |

FEELING GOOD 391

met them, their personalities contrasted with my expecta-
tions. He proved to be a relaxed, mild-mannered individual;
she was strikingly attractive, pleasant, and cooperative.

I administered several psychological tests to Holly. The
Beck Depression Inventory indicated severe depression, and
other tests confirmed a high degree of hopelessness and
serious suicidal intent. Holly put it to me bluntly, ‘‘I want
to kill myself.’’ The family history indicated that several
relatives had attempted suicide—two of them successfully.
When I asked Holly why she wanted to kill herself, she
told me that she was a lazy human being. She explained
that because she was lazy, she was worthless and so de-
served to die.

I wanted to find out if she would react favorably to cog-
nitive therapy, so I used a technique that I hoped would
capture her attention. I proposed we do some role-playing,
and she was to imagine that two attorneys were arguing her
case in court. Her father, by the way, happened to be an
attorney who specialized in medical malpractice suits! Be-
cause I was a novice therapist at the time, this intensified
my Own anxious, insecure feelings about tackling such a
tough case. [ told Holly to play the role of the prosecutor,
and she was to try to convince the jury that she deserved a
death sentence. I told her [ would play the role of the defense
attorney, and that I would challenge the validity of every
accusation she made. I told her that this way we could review
her reasons for living and her reasons for dying, and see
where the truth lay:

HOLLy: For this individual, suicide would be an escape
from life.

DaviD: That argument could apply to anyone in the
world. By itself, it is not a convincing reason to
die.

HoL_y: The prosecutor replies that the patient’s life is
so miserable, she cannot stand it one minute
longer.

392 David D. Burns, M.D.

DAVID:

HOLLY:

DAVID:

HOLLY:

DAVID:

HOLLY:

DAVID:

HOLLY:

DAVID:

She has been able to stand it up until now, so
maybe she can stand it a while longer. She was
not always miserable in the past, and there is no
proof that she will always be miserable in the
future.

The prosecutor points out that her life is a burden
to her family.

The defense emphasizes that suicide will not
solve this problem, since her death by suicide
may prove to be an even more crushing blow to
her family.

But she is self-centered and lazy and worthless,
and deserves to die!

What percentage of the population is lazy?

Probably twenty percent. . . no, I’d say only ten
percent.

That means twenty million Americans are lazy.
The defense points out that they don’t have to
die for this, so there is no reason the patient
should be singled out for death. Do you think
laziness and apathy are symptoms of depression?

Probably.

The defense points out that individuals in our
culture are not sentenced to death for the symp-
toms of illness, whether it be pneumonia, de-
pression, or any other disease. Furthermore, the
laziness may disappear when the depression goes
away.

Holly appeared to be involved in this repartee and amused
by it. After a series of such accusations and defenses, she
conceded that there was no convincing reason she should
have to die, and that any reasonable jury would have to rule
in favor of the defense. What was more important was that
Holly was learning to challenge and answer her negative
thoughts about herself. This process brought her partial but

FEELING GOOD 393

immediate emotional relief, the first she had experienced
in many years. At the end of the consultation session, she
said to me, ‘“‘This is the best that I have felt in as long as
I can remember. But now the negative thought crosses my
mind, ‘This new therapy may not prove to be as good as it
seems.’’’ In response to this she felt a sudden surge of
depression again. [ assured her, **Holly, the defense attor-
ney points out that this is no real problem. If the therapy
isn’t as good as it seems to be, you'll find out in a few
weeks, and you'll still have the alternative of a long-term
hospitalization. You'll have lost nothing. Furthermore, the
therapy may be partially as good as it seems, or conceivably
even better. Perhaps you would be willing to give it a try.”’
In response to this proposal, she decided to come to Phil-
adelphia for treatment.

Holly’s urge to commit suicide was simply the result of
cognitive distortions. She confused the symptoms of her
iliness, such as lethargy and loss of interest in life, with her
true identity and labeled herself as a ‘‘lazy person.’’ Because
Holly equated her worth as a human being with her achieve-
ment, she concluded she was worthless and deserved to die.
She jumped to the conclusion that she could never recover,
and that her family would be better off without her. She
magnified her discomfort by saying, “I! can’t stand it.’’ Her
sense of hopelessness was the result of the fortune-telling
error—she illogically jumped to the conclusion that she
could not improve. When Holly saw that she was simply
trapping herself with unrealistic thoughts, she felt a sudden
relief. In order to maintain such improvement, Holly had
to learn to correct her negative thinking on an ongoing basis
and that took hard work! She wasn’t going to give in that
easily!

Following our initial consultation, Holly was transferred
to a hospital in Philadelphia, where [ visited her twice a
week to initiate cognitive therapy. She had a stormy course
in the hospital with dramatic mood swings, but was able to
be discharged after a five-week period, and I persuaded her
to enroll as a part-time summer-school student. For a while

394 David D. Burns, M.D.

her moods continued to oscillate like a yo-yo, but she
showed an overall improvement. At times Holly would re-
port feeling very good for several days. This constituted a
real breakthrough, since these were the first happy periods
she had experienced since the age of thirteen. Then she
would suddenly relapse into a severe depressive state. At
these times she would again become actively suicidal, and
would try her best to convince me that life was not worth
living. Like many adolescents, she seemed to carry a grudge
against all mankind, and insisted there was no point in living
any longer.

In addition to feeling negative about her own sense of
worth, Holly had developed an intensely negative and dis-
illusioned view of the entire world. Not only did she see
herself as trapped by an endless, untreatable depression, but
like many of today’s adolescents, she had adopted a personal
theory of nihilism. This is the most extreme form of pes-
simism. Nihilism is the belief that there is no truth or mean-
ing to anything, and that all of life involves suffering and
agony. To a nihilist like Holly, the world offers nothing but
misery. She had become convinced that the very essence
of every person and object in the universe was evil and
horrible. Her depression was thus the experience of hell on
earth. Holly envisioned death as the only possible surcease,
and she longed for death. She constantly complained and
harangued cynically about the cruelties and miseries of liv-
ing. She insisted that life was totally unbearable at all times,
and that all human beings were totally lacking in redeeming
qualities.

The task of getting such an intelligent and persistent
young woman to see and admit how distorted her thinking
was provided a real challenge to this therapist! The following
lengthy dialogue illustrates her intensely negative attitudes
as well as my struggles to help her penetrate the illogic in
her thinking:

HOoLty: Life is not worth living because there is more
bad than good in the world.

FEELING GOOD 395

Davip: Suppose I was the depressed patient and you
were my therapist and I told you that, what
would you say?

(I used this maneuver with Holly because I knew her goal
in life was to be a therapist. I figured she’d say something
reasonable and upbeat, but she outfoxed me in her next
statement.)

Hotty: I'd say that I can’t argue with you!

Davipb: So, if I were your depressed patient and told you
that life is not worth living, you’d advise me to
jump out the window?

HoLt_y (laughing): Yes. When [ think about it, that’s
the best thing to do. If you think about all the
bad things that are going on in the world, the
right thing to do is to get really upset about them
and be depressed.

Davip: And what are the advantages to that? Does that
help you correct the bad things in the world or
what?

Hoty: No. But you can’t correct them.

Davib: Youcan’t correct all the bad things in the world,
or you can’t correct some of them?

HOLLy: You can’t correct anything of importance. |
guess you can correct small things. You can’t
really make a dent in the badness of this uni-
verse.

Davib: Now, at the end of each day if I said that to
myself when I went home, I could really become
upset. In other words, I could either think about
the people that I did help during the day and feel
good, or I could think of all the thousands of
people that I will never get a chance to see and
work with, and I could feel hopeless and help-
less. That would incapacitate me, and I don’t

396 David D. Burns, M.D.

HOLLY:

DAVID:

HOLLY:

DAVID:

HOLLY:

DAVID:

HOLLY:

DAVID:

HOLLY:

DAVID:

think that it is to my advantage to be incapaci-
tated. Is it to your advantage to be incapacitated?
Not really. Well, I don’t know.

You like being incapacitated?

No. Not unless I were completely incapacitated.
What would that be like?

I would be dead, and I think I would be better
off being that way.

Do you think being dead is enjoyable?

Well, I don’t even know what it’s like. I suppose

it might be horrible to be dead and to experience
nothing. Who knows?

So it might be horrible, or it might be nothing.
Now the closest thing to nothing is when you
are being anesthetized. Is that enjoyable?

It’s not enjoyable, but it’s not unenjoyable
either.

I’m glad you admit that it’s not enjoyable. And
you’re right, there’s really nothing enjoyable
about nothing. But there are some things enjoy-
able about life.

(At this point I thought I had really made a mark. But again,
in her adolescent insistence that things were no good, she
continued to outmaneuver me and contradict everything |
said. Her contrariness made my work with her challenging
and more than a bit frustrating at times.)

HOLLY:

DAVID:

But you see, there are so few things that are
enjoyable about life, and there is so much other
stuff that you have to go through to get those
few enjoyable things that it seems to me it just
doesn’t weigh out.

How do you feel when you’re feeling good? Do
you feel that it doesn’t weigh out then, or do
you just feel this way when you're feeling bad?

HOLLY:

DAVID:

HOLLY

DAVID:

HOLLY:

DAVID:

FEELING GOOD 397

It all depends on what J want to focus on, right?
The only way I get myself not to be depressed
is if I don’t think about all the lousy things in
this universe that make me depressed. Right? So
when I am feeling good, that means I’m focusing
on the good things. But all the bad things are
still there. Since there is so much more bad than
good, it is dishonest and phony to look only at
the good and feel good or feel happy, and that’s
why suicide is the best thing to do.

Well, there are two kinds of bad things in this
universe. One is the pseudo-bad. This is the
unreal bad that we create as a figment of our
imagination by the way we think about things.

(interrupting): Well, when I read the newspa-
pers, I see rapes and murders. That seems to me
to be the real bad.

Right. That’s what I call the real bad. But let’s
look at the pseudo-bad first.

Like what? What do you mean by pseudo-bad?

Well, take your statement that life is no good.
That statement is an inaccurate exaggeration. As
you pointed out, life has its good elements, its
bad elements, and its neutral elements. So the
statement that life is no good or that everything
is hopeless is just exaggerated and unrealistic.
This is what | mean by the pseudo-bad. On the
other hand, there are the real problems in life.
It’s true that people do get murdered and that
people do get cancer, but in my experience these
unpleasant things can be coped with. In fact, in
your life you will probably make the decision to
commit yourself to some aspect of the world’s
problems where you think you can make a con-
tribution to a solution. But even there, the mean-
ingful approach involves interaction with the

398 David D. Burns, M.D.

HOLLY:

DAVID:

HOLLY:
DAVID:

HOLLY:
DAVID:

problem in a positive way rather than getting
overwhelmed by it and sitting back and moping.

Well, see, that’s what I do. I just get immediately
overwhelmed with the bad things I encounter,
and then I feel like I ought to kill myself.

Right. Well, it might be nice if there were a
universe where there were no problems and no
suffering, but then there would be no opportunity
for people to grow or solve these problems
either. One of these days you'll probably take
one of the problems in the world, and contrib-
uting to its solution will become a source of
satisfaction to you.

Well, that’s not fair to use problems in that way.

Why don’t you test it out? I wouldn’t want you
to believe anything that I say unless you test it
out for yourself and find out if it’s true. The way
to test it out is to begin getting involved in things,
to go to classes, do your work, and establish
relationships with people.

That’s what I am beginning to do.

Well, you can see how it works out over a period
of time, and you may find that going to summer
school and making a contribution to this world,
and meeting with friends and getting involved
with activities, and doing your work and getting
adequate grades, and experiencing a sense of
achievement and pleasure in doing what you
can—all of this might not be satisfying to you,
and you might conclude, ‘‘Hey, depression was
better than this.”’ And “I don’t like being
happy.”” You might say, ‘“‘Hey, I don’t like
being involved in life.’’ If that’s true, you can
always go back to being depressed and hopeless.
I'm not going to take anything away from you.
But don’t knock happiness until you’ve tried it.

FEELING GOOD 399

Check it out. See what life is like when you get
involved and make an effort. Then we’ll see
where the chips fall at that time.

Holly again experienced a substantial emotional relief as
she realized, at least in part, that her intense conviction that
the world was no good and life was not worth living was
simply the result of her illogical way of looking at things.
She was making the mistake of focusing only on negatives
(the mental filter) and arbitrarily insisting that the positive
things in the world didn’t count (disqualifying the positive).
Consequently, she got the impression that everything was
negative and that life was not worth living. As she learned
to correct this error in her thinking, she began to experience
some improvement. Although she continued to have a num-
ber of ups and downs, the frequency and severity of her
mood swings diminished with time. She was so successful
in her summer-school work that she was accepted in the fall
as a full-time student at a top Ivy League college. Although
she made many pessimistic predictions that she would flunk
out because she didn’t have the brains to make it in aca-
demics, to her great surprise she did outstandingly well in
her classes. As she learned to transform her intense nega-
tivity into productive activity, she became a top-notch stu-
dent.

Holly and I had a parting of the ways after less than a
year of weekly sessions. In the middle of an argument, she
fled from the office, slammed the door, and vowed never
to return. Maybe she didn’t know any other way to say
goodbye. I believe she felt she was ready to try and make
it on her own. Perhaps she finally got tired of trying to batter
me down; after all, I was just as stubborn as she was! She
called me recently to let me know how things turned out.
Although she still struggles with her moods at times, she
is now a senior and at the top of her class. Her dream of
going to graduate school to pursue a professional career
appears to be a certainty. God bless you, Holly!

Holly’s thinking represents many of the mental traps that

400 David D. Burns, M.D.

can lead to a suicidal impulse. Nearly all suicidal patients
have in common an illogical sense of hopelessness and the
conviction they are facing an insoluble dilemma. Once you
expose the distortions in your thinking, you will experience
considerable emotional relief. This can give you a basis for
hope and can help you avert a dangerous suicide attempt.
In addition, the emotional relief can give you some breathing
room sO you can continue to make more substantive changes
in your life.

You may find it difficult to identify with a turbulent ad-
olescent like Holly, so let’s take a brief look at another more
common cause for suicidal thoughts and attempts—the sense
of disillusionment and despair that sometimes hits us in
middle age or in our senior years. As you review the past,
you may conclude that your life hasn’t really amounted to
much in comparison with the starry-eyed expectations of
your youth. This has been called the mid-life crisis—that
stage in which you review what you have actually done with
your life compared with your hopes and plans. If you cannot
resolve this crisis successfully, you may experience such
intense bitterness and such profound disappointment that
you may attempt suicide. Once again, the problem turns out
to have little, if anything, to do with reality. Instead, your
turmoil is based on twisted thinking.

Louise was a married woman in her fifties who had em-
igrated from Europe to the United States during World War
Il. Her family brought her to my office one day after she
had been discharged from an intensive care unit, where she
had been treated for an almost successful and totally un-
expected suicide attempt. The family was unaware she had
been experiencing serious depression, so her sudden suicide
attempt was a complete surprise. As I spoke with Louise,
she told me bitterly that her life had not measured up. She
had never experienced the joy and fulfillment that she
dreamed of as a girl: she complained of a sense of inade-
quacy and was convinced she was a failure as a human

FEELING GOOD 401

being. She told me that she had accomplished nothing
worthwhile and concluded her life was not worth living.

Because I felt a rapid intervention was necessary in order
to prevent a second suicide attempt, I used cognitive tech-
niques to demonstrate to her as fast as possible the illogic
of what she was saying to herself. I first asked her to give
me a list of things she had accomplished in life as a way
of testing her belief that she hadn’t succeeded at anything
worthwhile.

LOUISE:

DAVID:

LOUISE:

Well, I helped my family escape from the Nazi
terrorism and relocate in this country during
World War II. In addition, I learned to speak
many languages fluently—five of them—when
I was growing up. When we came to the United
States, I worked at an unpleasant job so that
enough money would be available for my fam-
ily. My husband and I raised a fine young son,
who went on to college and is now a highly
successful businessman. I’m a good cook; and
in addition to perhaps being a good mother, my
grandchildren seem to think I’m a good grand-
mother. These would be the things which I feel
I have accomplished during my life.

In light of all these accomplishments, how can
you tell me you have accomplished nothing?

You see, everyone in my family spoke five lan-
guages. Getting out of Europe was just a matter
of survival. My job was ordinary and required
no special talent. It is a mother’s duty to raise
her family, and any good housewife should learn
to cook. Because these are all the things I was
supposed to do, or that anyone could have done,
they are not real accomplishments. They are just
ordinary, and this is why I have decided to com-
mit suicide. My life is not worthwhile.

402 David D. Burns, M.D.

I realized that Louise was upsetting herself unnecessarily
by saying, *“It doesn’t count’’ with regard to anything good
about herself. This common cognitive distortion, called
‘*disqualifying the positive,’’ was her main enemy. Louise
focused only on her inadequacies or errors, and insisted that
her successes weren't worth anything. If you discount your
achievements in this way, you will create the mental illusion
that you are a worthless zero.

In order to demonstrate her mental error in a dramatic
fashion, | proposed that Louise and | do some role-playing.
[ told her that I would play the role of a depressed psychi-
atrist, and she was to be my therapist, who would try to
find out why I have been feeling so depressed.

LOUISE (as therapist): Why ts it you feel depressed, Dr.
Burns?

DaviD (as depressed psychiatrist): Well, I realize that
I’ve accomplished nothing with my life.

LoulseE: So you feel you’ve accomplished nothing? But
that doesn’t make sense. You must have accom-
plished something. For example, you care for
many sick depressed patients, and I understand
you publish articles about your research and give
lectures. It sounds like you have accomplished
a great deal at such a young age.

David: No. None of those things count. You see, it is
every doctor’s obligation to care for his patients.
So that doesn’t count. I’m just doing what I’m
supposed to do. Furthermore, it is my duty at
the university to do research and publish the
results. So these are not real accomplishments.
All the faculty members do this, and my research
is not very important, at any rate. My ideas are
just ordinary. My life is basically a failure.

Louise (laughing at herself—no longer being the ther-
apist): I can see that | have been criticizing my-
self like that for the past ten years.

FEELING GOOD 403

Davip (as therapist again): Now, how does it feel when
you continually say to yourself, ‘‘It doesn’t
count’’ whenever you think about the things you
have accomplished?

LoultsE: I feel depressed when I say this to myself.

Davip: And how much sense does it make to think of
the things that you haven’t done that you might
have liked to do, and to overlook the things that
you have done which turned out well and were
the result of substantial effort and determina-
tion?

LoulsE: It doesn’t make any sense at all.

As a result of this intervention, Louise was able to see she
had been arbitrarily upsetting herself by saying over and
over, ‘‘What I have done isn’t good enough.’’ When she
recognized how arbitrary it was to do this to herself, she
experienced immediate emotional relief, and her urge to
commit suicide disappeared. Louise realized that no matter
how much she had accomplished in her life, if she wanted
to upset herself she would always be able to look back and
say, “It wasn’t enough.’’ This indicated to her that her
problem was not realistic but simply a mental trap she had
fallen into. The role-reversal seemed to evoke a sense of
amusement and laughter in her. This stimulation of her sense
of humor appeared to help her recognize the absurdity of
her self-criticism, and she achieved a much needed sense
of compassion for herself.

Let’s review why your conviction that you are ‘‘hope-
less’’ is both irrational and self-defeating. First, remember
that depressive illness is usually, if not always, self-limiting,
and in most cases eventually disappears even without treat-
ment. The purpose of treatment is to speed the recovery
process. Many effective methods of drug therapy and psy-
chotherapy now exist, and others are being rapidly devel-
oped. Medical science is in a constant state of evolution.
We are currently experiencing a renaissance in our ap-

404 David D. Burns, M.D.

proaches to depressive illness. Because we cannot predict
yet with complete certainty which psychological interven-
tion or medication will be most helpful for a particular
patient, a number of techniques must sometimes be applied
until the right key to the locked-up potential for happiness
is found. Although this does require patience and hard work,
it is crucial to keep in mind that nonresponse to one or even
to several techniques does not indicate that all methods will
fail. In fact, the opposite is more often true. For example,
recent drug research has shown that patients who do not
respond to one antidepressant medication often have a better
than average chance of responding to another. This means
if you fail to respond to one of the agents, your chances for
improvement when you are given another may actually be
enhanced. When you consider that there are large numbers
of effective antidepressants, psychotherapeutic interven-
tions, and self-help techniques, the probability for eventual
recovery becomes tremendously high.

When you are depressed, you may have a tendency to
confuse feeling with facts. Your feelings of hopelessness
and total despair are just symptoms of depressive illness,
not facts. If you think you are hopeless, you will naturally
feel this way. Your feelings only trace the illogical pattern
of your thinking. Only an expert, who has treated hundreds
of depressed individuals, would be in a position to give a
meaningful prognosis for recovery. Your suicidal urge
merely indicates the need for treatment. Thus, your con-
viction that you are ‘‘hopeless’’ nearly always proves you
are not. Therapy, not suicide, is indicated. Although gen-
eralizations can be misleading, I let the following rule of
thumb guide me: Patients who feel hopeless never actually
are hopeless.

The conviction of hopelessness is one of the most curious
aspects of depressive illness. In fact, the degree of hope-
lessness experienced by seriously depressed patients who
have an excellent prognosis is usually greater than in ter-
minal malignancy patients with a poor prognosis. It is of
great importance to expose the illogic that lurks behind your

FEELING GOOD 405

hopelessness as soon as possible in order to prevent an actual
suicide attempt. You may feel convinced that you have an
insoluble problem in your life. You may feel that you are
caught in a trap from which there is no exit. This may lead
to extreme frustration and even to the urge to kill yourself
as the only escape. However, when I confront a depressed
patient with respect to precisely what kind of trap he or she
is in, and I zero in on the person’s ‘‘insoluble problem,”’
I invariably find that the patient is deluded. In this situation,
you are like an evil magician, and you create a hellish
illusion with mental magic. Your suicidal thoughts are il-
logical, distorted, and erroneous. Your twisted thoughts and
faulty assumptions, not reality, create your suffering. When
you learn to look behind the mirrors, you will see that you
are fooling yourself, and your suicidal urge will disappear.

It would be naive to say that depressed and suicidal in-
dividuals never have ‘‘real’’ problems. We ail have real
problems, including finances, interpersonal relationships,
health, etc. But such difficulties can nearly always be coped
with in a reasonable manner without suicide. In fact, meet-
ing such challenges can be a source of mood elevation and
personal growth. Furthermore, as pointed out in Chapter 9,
real problems can never depress you even to a small extent.
Only distorted thoughts can rob you of valid hopes or self-
esteem. I have never seen a ‘‘real’’ problem in a depressed
patient which was so “‘totally insoluble’’ that suicide was
indicated.


Part VI
Coping with the

Stresses and Strains

of Daily Living


Chapter 16

How ! Practice What | Preach

“Physician, heal thyself.’’—Luke 4:23

A recent study of stress has indicated that one of the world’s
most demanding jobs—in terms of the emotional tension
and the incidence of heart attacks—is that of an air-traffic
controller in an airport tower. The work involves precision,
and the traffic controller must be constantly alert—a blunder
could result in tragedy. I wonder however if that job is more
taxing than mine. After all, the pilots are cooperative and
intend to take off or land safely. But the ships I guide are
sometimes on an intentional crash course.

Here’s what happened during one thirty-minute period
last Thursday morning. At 10:25 I received the mail, and
skimmed a long, rambling, angry letter from a patient named
Felix just prior to the beginning of my 10:30 session. Felix
announced his plans to carry out a ‘‘blood bath,’’ in which
he would murder three doctors, including two psychiatrists
who had treated him in the past! In his letter Felix stated,
‘‘l’m just waiting until I get enough energy to drive to the
store and purchase the pistol and the bullets.’’ | was unable
to reach Felix by phone, so I began my 10:30 session with
Harry. Harry was emaciated and looked like a concentration
camp victim. He was unwilling to eat because of a delusion

409

410 David D. Burns, M.D.

that his bowels had ‘‘closed off,’’ and he had lost seventy
pounds. As I was discussing the unwelcome option of hos-
pitalizing Harry for forced tube feeding to prevent his death
from starvation, | received an emergency telephone call
from a patient named Jerome, which interrupted the session.
Jerome informed me he had placed a noose around his neck
and was seriously considering hanging himself before his
wife came home from work. He announced his unwilling-
ness to continue outpatient treatment and insisted that hos-
pitalization would be pointless.

I straightened out these three emergencies by the end of
the day, and went home to unwind. At just about bedtime
| received a call from a new referral—a well-known woman
VIP referred by another patient of mine. She indicated she’d
been depressed for several months, and that earlier in the
evening she’d been standing in front of a mirror practicing
slitting her throat with a razor blade. She explained she was
calling me only to pacify the friend who referred her to me,
but was unwilling to schedule an appointment because she
was convinced her case was ‘‘hopeless.’”’

Every day ts not as nerve-racking as that one! But at times
it does seem like I’m living in a pressure cooker. This gives
me a wealth of opportunities to learn to cope with intense
uncertainty, worry, frustration, irritation, disappointment,
and guilt. It affords me the chance to put my cognitive
techniques to work on myself and see firsthand if they’re
actually effective. There are many sublime and joyous mo-
ments too.

If you have ever gone to a psychotherapist or counselor,
the chances are that the therapist did nearly all the listening
and expected you to do most of the talking. This is because
many therapists are trained to be relatively passive and non-
directive—a kind of ‘Shuman mirror’’ who simply reflects
what you are saying.* This one-way style of communication

*Some of the newer forms of psychiatric treatment, such as cognitive
therapy, allow for a natural fifty-fiftty dialogue between the client and
therapist, who work together as equal members of a team.

FEELING GOOD 411

may have seemed unproductive and frustrating to you. You
may have wondered—‘‘What is my psychiatrist really like?
What kinds of feelings does he have? How does he deal
with them? What pressures does he feel in dealing with me
or with other patients?’’

Many patients have asked me directly, “‘Dr. Burns, do
you actually practice what you preach?’’ The fact is, I often
do pull out a sheet of paper on the train ride home in the
evening, and draw a line down the center from top to bottom
so I can utilize the double-column technique to cope with
any nagging emotional hangovers from the day. If you are
curious to take a look behind the scenes, I'll be glad to
share some of my self-help homework with you. This is
your chance to sit back and listen while the psychiatrist does
the talking! At the same time, you can get an idea of how
the cognitive techniques you have mastered to overcome
clinical depression can be applied to all sorts of daily frus-
trations and tensions that are an inevitable part of living for
all of us.

Coping With Hostility:
The Man Who Fired Twenty Doctors

One high-pressure situation | often face involves dealing
with angry, demanding, unreasonable individuals. I suspect
I have treated a few of the East Coast’s top anger champions.
These people often take their resentment out on the people
who care the most about them, and sometimes this includes
me.

Hank was an angry young man. He had fired twenty
doctors before he was referred to me. Hank complained of
episodic back pain, and was convinced he suffered from
some severe medical disorder. Because no evidence for any
physical abnormality had ever surfaced, in spite of lengthy,
elaborate medical evaluations, numerous physicians told
him that his aches and pains were in all likelihood the result
of emotional tension, much like a headache. Hank had dif-

412 David D. Burns, M.D.

ficulty accepting this, and he felt his doctors were writing
him off and just didn’t give a damn about him. Over and
over he’d explode in a fury, fire his doctor, and seek out
someone new. Finally, he consented to see a psychiatrist.
He resented this referral, and after making no progress for
about a year, he fired his psychiatrist and sought treatment
at our Mood Clinic.

Hank was quite depressed, and I began to train him in
cognitive techniques. At night when his back pain flared
up, Hank would work himself up into a frustrated rage and
impulsively call me at home (he had persuaded me to give
him my home number so he wouldn’t have to go through
the answering service). He would begin by swearing and
accusing me of misdiagnosing his illness. He’d insist he
had a medical, not a psychiatric, problem. Then he’d deliver
some unreasonable demand tn the form of an ultimatum:
‘‘Dr. Burns, either you arrange for me to get shock treat-
ments tomorrow or II] go out and commit suicide tonight.’’
It was usually difficult, if not impossible, for me to comply
with most of his demands. For example, I don’t give shock
treatments, and furthermore | didn’t feel this type of treat-
ment was indicated for Hank. When I would try to explain
this diplomatically, he would explode and threaten some
impulsive destructive action.

During our psychotherapy sessions Hank had the habit
of pointing out each of my imperfections (which are real
enough). He’d often storm around the office, pound on the
furniture, heaping insults and abuse on me. What used to
get me in particular was Hank’s accusation that I didn’t care
about him. He said that all | cared about was money and
maintaining a high therapy success rate. This put me in a
dilemma, because there was a grain of truth in his criti-
cisms—he was often several months behind in making pay-
ments for his therapy, and I was concerned that he might
drop out of treatment prematurely and end up even more
disillusioned. Furthermore, I was eager to add him to my
list of successfully treated individuals. Because there was

FEELING GOOD 413

some truth in Hank’s haranguing attacks, I felt guilty and
defensive when he would zero in on me. He, of course,
would sense this, and consequently the volume of his crit-
icism would increase.

I sought some guidance from my associates at the Mood
Clinic as to how | might handle Hank’s outbursts and my
own feelings of frustration more effectively. The advice |
received from Dr. Beck was especially useful. First, he
emphasized that I was “‘unusually fortunate’? because Hank
was giving me a golden opportunity to learn to cope with
criticism and anger effectively. This came as a complete
surprise to me; I hadn’t realized what good fortune | had.
In addition to urging me to use cognitive techniques to
reduce and eliminate my own sense of irritation, Dr. Beck
proposed I try out an unusual strategy for interacting with
Hank when he was in an angry mood. The essence of this
method was: (1) Don’t turn Hank off by defending yourself.
Instead, do the opposite—urge him to say all the worst
things he can say about you. (2) Try to find a grain of truth
in all his criticisms and then agree with him. (3) After this,
point out any areas of disagreement in a straightforward,
tactful, nonargumentative manner. (4) Emphasize the im-
portance of sticking together, in spite of these occasional
disagreements. I could remind Hank that frustration and
fighting might slow down our therapy at times, but this need
not destroy the relationship or prevent our work from ul-
timately becoming fruitful.

I applied this strategy the next time Hank started storming
around the office screaming at me. Just as I had planned,
1 urged Hank to keep it up and say all the worst things he
could think of about me. The result was immediate and
dramatic. Within a few moments, all the wind went out of
his sails—all his vengeance seemed to melt away. He began
communicating sensibly and calmly, and sat down. In fact,
when I agreed with some of his criticisms, he suddenly
began to defend me and say some nice things about me! |
was so impressed with this result that I began using the

414 David D. Burns, M.D.

same approach with other angry, explosive individuals, and
I actually did begin to enjoy his hostile outbursts because
I had an effective way to handle them.

I also used the double-column technique for recording
and talking back to my automatic thoughts after one of
Hank’s midnight calls (see Figure 16-1, page 415). As my
associates suggested, I tried to see the world through Hank’s
eyes in order to gain a certain degree of empathy. This was
a specific antidote that in part dissolved my own frustration
and anger, and I felt much less defensive and upset. It helped
me to see his outbursts more as a defense of his own self-
esteem than as an attack on me, and I was able to compre-
hend his feelings of futility and desperation. I reminded
myself that much of the time he was damn hardworking and
cooperative, and how foolish it was for me to demand he
be totally cooperative at all times. As I began to feel more
calm and confident in my work with Hank, our relationship
continually improved.

Eventually, Hank’s depression and pain subsided, and he
terminated his work with me. I hadn’t seen him for many
months when I received a message from my answering
service that Hank wanted me to call him. I suddenly felt
apprehensive; memories of his turbulent tirades flooded my
mind, and my stomach muscles tensed up. With some hes-
itation and mixed feelings, I dialed his number. It was a
sunny Saturday afternoon, and I’d been looking forward to
a much needed rest after an especially taxing week. Hank
answered the phone: ‘““‘Dr. Burns, this is Hank. Do you
remember me? There’s something I’ve been meaning to tell
you for some time...’’ He paused, and I braced for the
impending explosion. ‘‘I’ve been essentially free of pain
and depression since we finished up a year ago. I went off
disability and I’ve gotten a job. I’m also the leader of a
self-help group in my own hometown.”’

This wasn’t the Hank I remembered! I felt a wave of
relief and delight as he went on to explain, ‘‘But that’s not
why I’m calling. What I want to say to you is...’’ There
was another moment of silence—‘‘I’m grateful for your

Automatic Thoughts

Figure 16-1. Coping with Hostility.

Rational Responses

. ve put more energy 1. Stop complaining. You sound

into working with Hank
than nearly anyone, and
this is what I get—
abuse!

. Why doesn’t he trust
me about his diagnosis
and treatment?

. But in the meantime, he
should at least treat me
with respect!

. But is it fair for him to
call me so often at
home at night? And
does he have to be so
abusive?

like Hank! He’s frightened and
frustrated, and he’s trapped in
his resentment. Just because
you work hard for someone, it
doesn’t necessarily follow that
they’ feel appreciative.
Maybe he will some day.

. Because he’s in a panic, he’s

extremely uncomfortable and
in pain, and he hasn’t yet got-
ten any substantial results.
He’ll believe you once he starts
getting well.

. Do you expect him to show re-

spect all the time or part of the
time? In general, he exerts tre-
mendous effort in his self-help
program and does treat you
with respect. He’s determined
to get well—if you don’t ex-
pect perfection, you won’t
have to feel frustrated.

. Talk it over with him when

you're both feeling more re-
laxed. Suggest that he supple-
ment his individual therapy by
joining a self-help group in
which the various patients call
each other for moral support.
This will make it easier for him
to cut down on calls to you.
But for now, remember that he
doesn’t plan these emergen-
cies, and they are very terri-
fying and real to him.

416 David D. Burns, M.D.

efforts, and I now know you were right all along. There
was nothing dreadfully wrong with me, I was just upsetting
myself with my irrational thinking. I just couldn’t admit it
until I knew for sure. Now, I feel like a whole man, and I
had to call you up and let you know where I stood... It
was hard for me to do this, and I’m sorry it took so long
for me to get around to telling you.”’

Thank you, Hank! I want you to know that some tears
of joy and pride in you come to my eyes as [ write this. It
was worth the anguish we both went through a hundred
times over!

Coping With Ingratitude:
The Woman Who Couldn't Say Thank You

Did you ever go out of your way to do a favor for someone
only to have the person respond to your efforts with indif-
ference or nastiness? People shouldn't be so unappreciative,
right? If you tell yourself this, you will probably stew for
days as you mull the incident over and over. The more
inflammatory your thoughts and fantasies become, the more
disturbed and angry you will feel.

Let me tell you about Susan. After high-school gradua-
tion, Susan sought treatment for a recurrent depression. She
was very skeptical that I could help her and continually
reminded me that she was hopeless. She had been in a
hysterical state for several weeks because she couldn’t de-
cide which of two colleges to attend. She acted as though
the world would come to an end if she didn’t make the
“‘right’’ decision, and yet the choice was simply not clear-
cut. Her insistence on eliminating all uncertainty was bound
to cause her endless frustration because it simply couldn't
be done.

She cried and sobbed excessively. She was insulting and
abusive to her boyfriend and her family. One day she called
me on the phone, pleading for help. She just had to make
up her mind. She rejected every suggestion I made, and

FEELING GOOD 417

angrily demanded I come up with some better approach.
She kept insisting, “‘Since I can’t make this decision, it
proves your cognitive therapy won’t work for me. Your
methods are no damn good. I'll never be able to decide,
and I can’t get better.’’ Because she was so upset, I arranged
my afternoon schedule so that I could have an emergency
consultation with a colleague. He offered several outstand-
ing suggestions; I called her right back and gave her some
tips on how to resolve her indeciveness. She was then able
to come to a Satisfactory decision within fifteen minutes,
and felt an instantaneous wave of relief.

When she came in for her next regularly scheduled ses-
sion, she reported she had been feeling relaxed since our
talk, and had finalized the arrangements to attend the college
that she chose. [ anticipated waves of gratitude because of
my strenuous efforts on her behalf, and I asked her if she
was still convinced that cognitive techniques would be in-
effective for her. She reported, “‘Yes, indeed! This just
proves my point. My back was up against the wall, and I
had to make a decision. The fact that I’m feeling good now
doesn’t count because it can’t last. This stupid therapy can’t
help me. I’ll be depressed for the rest of my life.’’ My
thought: ‘‘My God! How illogical can you get? I could turn
mud into gold, and she wouldn’t even notice!’’ My blood
was boiling, so I decided to use the double-column technique
later that day to try and calm my troubled and insulted spirits
(see Figure 16-2, page 418).

After writing down my automatic thoughts, I was able to
pinpoint the irrational assumption that caused me to get upset
over her ingratitude. It was, “‘If | do something to help
someone, they are duty-bound to feel grateful and reward
me for it.’’ It would be nice if things worked like this, but
it’s simply not the case. No one has a moral or legal ob-
ligation to credit me for my cleverness or praise my good
efforts on their behalf. So why expect it or demand it? |
decided to tune in to reality and adopt a more realistic
attitude: “‘If I do something to help someone, the chances
are the person will be appreciative, and that will feel good.

Figure 16—2. Coping with Ingratitude.

Automatic Thoughts

Rational Responses

1. How can sucha brijlhiant 1. Easily! Her illogical thinking

girl be so illogical?

2. But I can’t. She’s de-
termined to beat me
down. She won’t give
me an ounce of satisfac-
tion.

3. But she should admit I
helped her! She should
be grateful!

2.

is the cause of her depression.
If she didn’t continually focus
on negatives and disqualify
positives, she wouldn’t be de-
pressed so often. It’s your job
to train her in how to get over
this.

She doesn’t have to give you
any satisfaction. Only you can
do this. Don’t you recall that
only your thoughts affect your
moods? Why not credit your-
self for what you did? Don’t
wait around for her. You just
learned some exciting things
about how to guide people in
making decisions. Doesn't that
count?

. Why ‘‘should’’ she? That’s a

fairy tale. If she could she
probably would, but she can’t
yet. In time she’ll come
around, but she’ll have to re-
verse an ingrained pattern of
illogical thinking that’s been
dominating her mind for over
a decade. She may be afraid
to admit she’s getting help so
she won’t end up disillusioned
again. Or she might be afraid
you'll say, ‘‘I told you so.”’
Be like Sherlock Holmes and
see if you can figure out this
puzzle. It’s pointless to de-
mand that she be different from
the way she ts.

FEELING GOOD 419

But every now and then, someone will not respond the way
I want. If the response is unreasonable, this 1s a reflection
on that person, not me, so why get upset over it?’’ This
attitude has made life much sweeter for me, and overall |
have been blessed with as much gratitude from patients as
I could desire. Incidentally, Susan gave me a call just the
other day. She’d done well at college and was about to
graduate. Her father had been depressed, and she wanted a
referral to a good cognitive therapist! Maybe that was her
way of saying thank you!

Coping With Uncertainty and Helplessness:
The Woman Who Decided to Commit Suicide

On my way to the office on Monday, I always wonder
what the week will hold in store. One Monday morning I
was in for an abrupt shock. As I unlocked the office, I found
some papers had been slipped under the door over the week-
end—a twenty-page letter from a patient named Annie. An-
nie had been referred to me several months earlier on her
twentieth birthday, after having received eight years of com-
pletely successful treatment from several therapists for a
horrible, grotesque mood disorder. From age twelve on,
Annie’s life had deteriorated into a nightmarish pattern of
depression and self-mutilation. She loved to slash her arms
to shreds with sharp objects, one time requiring 200 stitches.
She also made a number of nearly successful suicide at-
tempts.

I tensed as I picked up her note. Annie had recently
expressed a deep sense of despair. In addition to depression,
she suffered from a severe eating disorder, and the previous
week had engaged in a bizarre three-day spree of compul-
sive, uncontrollable binge-eating. Going from restaurant to
restaurant, she would stuff herself for hours nonstop. Then
she’d vomit it all up and eat some more. In her note she
described herself as a “‘human garbage disposal,’’ and ex-
plained that she was beyond hope. She indicated that she

420 David D. Burns, M.D.

had decided to give up trying because she realized she was
basically ‘‘a nothing.’’

Without reading further, I called her apartment. Her
roommates told me that she had packed up and “‘left town’”’
for three days without giving any indication of where or
why. Alarms sounded in my head! This is exactly what she
had done on her last several suicide attempts prior to treat-
ment—she’d drive to a motel, sign in under an assumed
name, and overdose. I continued to read her letter. In it she
stated, ““I’m drained, I’m like a burnt-out light bulb. You
can pipe electricity into it, but it just won’t light up. I’m
sorry but I guess it’s just too late. I’m not going to feel
false hope any longer . . . During the last few moments I do
not feel particularly sad. Once every so often [ try to grasp
onto life, hoping to clench my hands around something,
anything—but I keep grasping nothing, empty.’’

It sounded like a bona fide suicide note, although no
explicit intention was announced. I suddenly became sub-
merged by a massive uncertainty and helplessness—she had
disappeared and left no traces. I felt angry and anxious.
Because | could do nothing for her, I decided to write down
the automatic thoughts that flowed through my mind. |
hoped some rational responses would help me cope with
the intense uncertainty I was facing (see Figure 16-3, page
421).

After recording my thoughts, [ decided to call my as-
sociate, Dr. Beck, for a consultation. He agreed that I should
assume she was alive unless it was proved otherwise. He
suggested that if she were found dead, [ could then learn
to cope with one of the professional hazards of working
with depression. If she was alive, as we assumed, he em-
phasized the importance of persisting with treatment until
her depression finally broke.

The effect of this conversation and the written exercise
was magnificent. I realized [| was under no obligation to
assume ‘‘the worst,’’ and that it was my right to choose not
to make myself miserable over her possible suicide attempt.

. This means

Automatic Thoughts

Figure 16—3. Coping with Uncertainty.

Rational Responses

. She’s probably made a 1. There’s no proof she’s dead.

suicide attempt——and
succeeded.

. If she’s dead, it means
I killed her.

. If Pd done something
different last week, |
could have prevented
this. It’s my fault.

. This shouldn’t have

happened—! tried so

hard.

my ap-
proach is second-rate.

. Her parents will be an-
gry with me.

. Dr. Beck and my asso-
ciates will be angry
with me—they’ll know
I’m incompetent, and
they'll look down on
me.

Why not assume she’s alive
until proven otherwise? Then
you won't have to worry and
obsess in the meantime.

. No, you’re nota killer. You're

trying to help.

. You’re not a fortune teller—

you can’t predict the future.
You do the best you can based
on what you know—draw the
line there and respect yourself
on this basis.

. Whatever happened did hap-

pen. Just because you make
maximal efforts, there’s no
guarantee about the results. |
You can’t control her, only |
your efforts.

. Your approach is one of the |

finest ever developed, and you
apply yourself with great effort
and commitment, and get out-
Standing results. You are not
second-rate.

. They may and they may not.

They know how — you've
knocked yourself out for her

. Extremely unlikely. We'll all

be disappointed to lose a pa-
tient we’ve gone to such cx-
treme lengths to help, but
your peers won’t feel you've
let them down. If you’re at
all concerned, call them!
Practice what you preach,
Burns.

422 David D. Burns, M.D.

Figure 16-3. cont.

Automatic Thoughts Rational Responses

| 8. Pl feel miserable and 8. You’ll only feel miserable if
guilty until I find out you make a negative assump-

what happened. I’m ex- tion. Odds are (a) she’s alive

pected to feel that way. and (b) she’ll get better. As-
sume this and you’ll feel good!
You have no obligation to feel
bad—you have the right to re-
fuse to get upset.

I decided I couldn’t take on responsibility for her actions,
only for mine, and that I had done well with her and would
stubbornly continue to do so until she and I had finally
defeated her depression and tasted victory.

My anxiety and anger disappeared completely, and | felt
relaxed and peaceful until ! received the news by telephone
on Wednesday morning. She had been found unconscious
in a motel room fifty miles from Philadelphia. This was her
eighth suicide attempt, but she was alive and complaining
as usual in the Intensive Care Unit of an outlying hospital.
She would survive, but would require plastic surgery to
replace the skin over her elbows and ankles because of sores
which had developed during the long period of uncon-
sciousness. I arranged for her transfer to the University of
Pennsylvania, where she would be back tn my relentless,
cognitive clutches again!

When I spoke with her, she was enormously bitter and
hopeless. The next couple of months of therapy were es-
pecially turbulent. But the depression finally began to lift
in her eleventh month, and exactly one year to the day of
her referral, her twenty-first birthday, the symptoms of
depression disappeared.

The Payoff. My joy was enormous. Women must have
this feeling when they first see their child after delivery—all

FEELING GOOD 423

the discomfort of pregnancy and the pain of delivery are
forgotten. It’s the celebration of life—quite a heady expe-
rience. I find that the more chronic and severe the depres-
sion, the more intense the therapeutic struggle becomes. But
when the patient and I at last discover the combination that
unlocks the door to their inner peace, the riches inside far
exceed any effort or frustration that occurred along the way.


Part VII
The Chemistry of Mood

NOTE: Numbered Notes and References for Chapters
17-20 can be found on pages 682-687. Because some
References are cited more than once, the superscript
numbers assigned to those References will appear in
these chapters more than once.


Chapter 17

The Search for “Black Bile”

(Notes and References appear on pages 682-687.)

Some day, scientists may provide us with frightening tech-
nology that will allow us to change our moods at will. This
technology may be in the form of a safe, fast-acting med-
ication that relieves depression in a matter of hours with
few or no side effects. This breakthrough will represent one
of the most extraordinary and philosophically confusing de-
velopments in human history. In a sense, it will almost be
like discovering the Garden of Eden again—and we may
face new ethical dilemmas. People will probably ask ques-
tions like these: When should we use this pill? Are we
entitled to be happy all the time? Is sadness sometimes a
normal and healthy emotion, or should it always be con-
sidered an abnormality that needs treatment? Where do we
draw the line?

Some people think such technology has already arrived
in the form of a pill called Prozac. When you read the next
few chapters, you will see that this is not really the case.
Although we have large numbers of antidepressant medi-
cations that work for some people, many people do not
respond to antidepressant medications in a satisfactory way,
and when they do improve, the improvement is often in-
complete. Clearly, we are still a long way from our goal.

In addition, we still do not really know how the brain

427

428 David D. Burns, M.D.

creates emotions. We do not know why some people are
more prone to negative thinking and gloomy moods
throughout their lives, whereas others seem to be eternal
optimists who always have a positive outlook and a cheer-
ful disposition. Is depression partially genetic? Is it due to
some type of chemical or hormonal imbalance? Is it some-
thing we’re born with, or something we learn? The answers
to these questions still elude us. Many people wrongly be-
lieve we already have the answers.

The answers to questions about treatment are equally un-
clear. Which patients should be treated with medications?
Which patients need psychotherapy? Is the combination
better than either type of treatment alone? You will see that
the answers to questions as basic as these are more contro-
versial than you might expect.

In this chapter, I address these issues. I discuss whether
depression is caused more by biology (nature) or the en-
vironment (nurture). I explain how the brain works, and
review evidence that depression might be caused by a
chemical imbalance in the brain. I also describe how anti-
depressant drugs attempt to correct this imbalance.

In Chapter 18, I discuss the ‘‘mind-body problem’’ and
address the current controversies about treatments that af-
fect the ‘‘mind’’ (for instance, cognitive therapy) versus
treatments that affect the ‘“body’’ (for instance, antidepres-
sants.) In Chapters 19 and 20, I will give you practical
information about all the antidepressant drugs that are cur-
rently prescribed for mood problems.

Do Genetic or Environmental Influences Play
a Greater Role in Depression?

Although much research is being conducted to try to
tease out the relative strengths of the genetic and environ-
mental influences on depression, scientists do not yet know
which influences are the most important. With regard to
bipolar (manic-depressive) illness, the evidence is quite

FEELING GOOD 429

strong: genetic factors seem to play a strong role. For ex-
ample, if one identical twin develops bipolar manic-
depressive illness, the odds are high that the other twin
will also develop this disorder (50 percent to 75 percent).
In contrast, when one of two nonidentical twins develops
bipolar (manic-depressive) illness, the odds that the other
twin will develop the same illness are lower (15 percent
to 25 percent). The odds of developing bipolar illness if
a parent or nontwin sibling has this disorder are around
10 percent. All these odds are considerably higher than
the odds that someone in the general population will de-
velop bipolar illness—the lifetime risk is estimated at
less than 1 percent.

Keep in mind that identical twins have identical genes,
whereas nonidentical twins share only half their genes. This
is probably why the likelihood of bipolar (manic-
depressive) illness is so much higher if you have an iden-
tical twin than if you have a nonidentical twin with this
disorder, and why these rates are so much higher than the
rates for bipolar illness in the general population. The in-
creased risk for bipolar illness among identical twins is
even true if the identical twins are separated at birth and
raised by different families. Although the adoption of iden-
tical twins by separate families is rare, it does happen on
occasion. In some cases, scientists have been able to locate
the twins later in life to determine how similar or different
they are. These ‘‘natural’’ experiments can tell us a great
deal about the relative importance of genes versus environ-
ment because the separately raised identical twins have
identical genes but their environments are different. Such
studies highlight the importance of strong genetic influ-
ences in bipolar disorder.

With regard to the far more common garden-variety de-
pression without episodes of uncontrollable mania, the ev-
idence for genetic factors is still quite fuzzy. Part of the
problem facing genetic researchers is that the diagnosis of
depression is much less clear-cut than the diagnosis of bi-

430 David D. Burns, M.D.

polar (manic-depressive) illness. Bipolar manic-depressive
illness is such an unusual disorder, at least in its more
severe forms, that the diagnosis is often obvious. The pa-
tient has a sudden and alarming change in personality that
comes on without drugs or alcohol, along with symptoms
Such as:

intense euphoria, often with irritability;

incredible energy with constant exercising or restless,
agitated body movements;

¢ very little need for sleep;
* nonstop, pressured talking;
¢ racing thoughts that skip from subject to subject;

¢ grandiose delusions (for example, the sudden belief
that one has a plan for world peace);

impulsive, reckless, and inappropriate behaviors (such
as spending money foolishly);

inappropriate, excessive flirtatiousness and sexual ac-
tivity;
e hallucinations (in severe cases).

These symptoms are usually unmistakable and often so un-
controllable that the patient may require hospitalization
with medication treatment. Following recovery, the individ-
ual usually returns to absolutely normal functioning again.
These distinct features of bipolar illness make genetic re-
search relatively straightforward, since it is usually not dif-
ficult to determine when individuals have the disorder and
when they do not. In addition, this disorder usually begins
fairly early in life, with the first episode often occurring by
the age of twenty to twenty-five.

In contrast, the diagnosis of depression is much less ob-
vious. Where does normal sadness end and clinical
depression begin? The answer is somewhat arbitrary, but
the decision will have a big impact on the results of re-

FEELING GOOD 431

search. Another difficult question genetic researchers face
is this: How long should we wait before we decide whether
or not a person has developed a clinical depression during
his or her life? Suppose, for example, that an individual
with a strong family history of depression dies in an auto
accident at the age of twenty-one without ever having had
an episode of clinical depression. We might conclude that
she or he did not inherit the tendency for depression. But
if that individual had not died, she or he might have de-
veloped an episode of depression later on in life, since a
first episode of depression can often occur when you are
older than twenty-one.

Problems like this are not insurmountable, but they do
make genetic research on depression difficult. In fact, many
previously published studies on the genetics of depression
are quite flawed and do not permit us to make any unam-
biguous conclusions about the importance of heredity ver-
Sus environment in this disorder. Fortunately, more
sophisticated studies are now under way, and we may have
better answers to these questions during the next five to ten
years.

Is Depression Caused by a “Chemical
Imbalance” in the Brain?

Throughout the ages, humans have searched for the
causes of depression. Even in ancient times there was some
suspicion that blue moods were due to an imbalance in
body chemistry. Hippocrates (460-377 B.c.) thought that
‘‘black bile’’ was the culprit. In recent years scientists have
spearheaded an intensive search for the elusive black bile.
They have tried to pinpoint the imbalances in brain chem-
istry that might cause depression. There are hints about the
answer, but in spite of increasingly sophisticated research
tools, scientists have not yet discovered the causes of de-
pression.

At least two major arguments have been advanced to

432 David D. Burns, M.D.

support the notion that some type of chemical imbalance
or brain abnormality may play a role in clinical depression.
First, the physical (somatic) symptoms of severe depression
Support the notion that organic changes might be involved.
These physical symptoms include agitation (increased ner-
vous activity such as pacing or hand-wringing) or enormous
fatigue (motionless apathy—you feel like a ton of bricks
and do nothing). You also may experience a ‘‘diurnal’’ var-
lation in your mood. This refers to a worsening of the
symptoms of depression in the morning and an improve-
ment toward the end of the day. Other physical symptoms
of depression include disturbed sleep patterns (insomnia is
the most common), constipation, changes in appetite (usu-
ally decreased, sometimes increased), trouble concentrating,
and a loss of interest in sex. Because these symptoms of
depression ‘‘feel’’ quite physical, there is a tendency to
think that the causes of depression are physical.

A second argument for a physiologic cause for depres-
sion is that at least some mood disorders seem to run in
families, suggesting a role for genetic factors. If there is an
inherited abnormality that predisposes some individuals to
depression, it could be in the form of a disturbance in body
chemistry, as with so many genetic diseases.

The genetic argument is interesting but the data are in-
conclusive. The evidence for genetic influences in bipolar
manic-depressive illness is much stronger than the evidence
for genetic influences in the more common forms of de-
pression that afflict most people. In addition, lots of things
that do not have genetic causes run in families. For ex-
ample, families in the United States nearly always speak
English, and families in Mexico nearly always speak Span-
ish. We can say that the tendency to speak a certain lan-
guage also runs in families, but the language you speak is
learned and not inherited.

I don’t mean to discount the importance of genetic fac-
tors. Recent studies of identical twins who were separated
at birth and raised in different families show that many
traits we think of as being learned are actually inherited.

FEELING GOOD 433

Even such personality traits as a tendency toward shyness
or sociability appear to be partly inherited. Personal pref-
erences, such as liking a particular flavor of ice cream, may
also be strongly influenced by our genes. It seems plausible
that we may also inherit a tendency to look at things either
in a positive, optimistic way or in a negative, gloomy way.
Much more research will be needed to sort out this possi-
bility.

How Does the Brain Work?

The brain is essentially an electrical system that is similar
in some ways to a computer. Different portions of the brain
are specialized for different kinds of functions. For exam-
ple, the surface of the brain toward the back of your head
is called the ‘occipital cortex.’’ This is where vision takes
place. If you had a stroke that affected this region of the
brain, you would have trouble with your vision. A small
region on the surface of the left half of your brain is called
“‘Broca’s area.’’ This is the part of your brain that allows
you to talk to other people. If this part of your brain were
injured by a stroke, you would have difficulty talking. You
might be able to think of what you wanted to say, but find
that you had ‘‘forgotten’’ how to speak the words. A prim-
itive part of your brain called the ‘‘limbic system’’ is
thought to be involved in the control of emotions such as
joy, sadness, fear, or anger. However, our knowledge of
where and how the brain creates positive and negative emo-
tions is still very limited.

We do know that nerves are the ‘‘wires’’ that make up
the electrical circuits in the brain. The long thin part of a
nerve is called the ‘‘axon.’’ When a nerve is stimulated, it
sends an electrical signal along the axon to the end of the
nerve. A nerve is much more complex than a simple wire,
however. For example, a nerve may receive input from tens
of thousands of other nerves. Once it is stimulated, its axon
may send out signals to tens of thousands of other nerves.

434 David D. Burns, M.D.

Hi! My name Is Sara Tonin!
I’m a neurotransmitter!

Serotonin Recepto

Postsynaptic Nerve

Synapse
Figure 17-1. When the presynaptic nerve fires, packets of seroto-
nin molecules (neurotransmitters) are released into the synapse.
They swim over to the receptors on the surface of the postsynaptic
nerve.

This is because the axon can divide and send out many
branches. Each of these branches also divides into even
more branches, in much the same way that the trunk of a
tree divides into more and more branches. Because of this
branching tendency, a single nerve in the brain may send
out signals to as many as 25,000 other nerves that are lo-
cated throughout the entire brain.

How do the nerves in your brain communicate their elec-
trical signals to other nerves? To understand this, take a
look at Figure 17-1 above. You can see a simplified dia-
gram of two nerves. The region where they meet is called
the ‘‘synapse.’’ You may not be familiar with that term,
but don’t feel intimidated by it. It just means the space
between two nerves. The left-hand nerve is called the ‘‘pre-
Synaptic nerve’’ and the right-hand nerve is called the
““postsynaptic nerve.’” Again, these terms do not have any
other fancy or special meanings. They merely refer to the
nerve that ends (presynaptic nerve) or begins (postsynaptic
nerve) on the left or right edge of the synapse in the figure.

The communication of the electrical signal across this

FEELING GOOD 435

synapse is important to our understanding of how the brain
works. The synaptic region between the presynaptic nerve
on the left and the postsynaptic nerve on the right is filled
with fluid. This discovery was a major breakthrough in the
history of neuroscience. When you think of it, this discov-
ery 1s not so surprising since our bodies are made up pri-
marily of water. However, scientists were puzzled because
they knew that the electrical impulses of nerves were too
weak to travel across the synaptic fluid. So how does the
presynaptic nerve on the left in Figure 17-1 send its elec-
trical signal across the fluid-filled synapse to the postsy-
naptic nerve?

As an analogy, imagine that you are hiking and you come
to a river. You really need to get to the other side, but the
water is too deep. Furthermore, there’s no bridge and it’s
too far to jump. How do you get to the other side? You
might need a canoe, or you might have to swim for it.

Nerves face a similar problem. Because their electrical
impulses are too weak to jump across synapses, the nerves
send little swimmers across with their messages. These little
swimmers are chemicals called ‘‘neurotransmitters.’’ The
nerve in Figure 17-1 uses a neurotransmitter called sero-
tonin.

You can see in Figure 17-1 that when the presynaptic
nerve fires, it releases many tiny packets of serotonin into
the synapse. Once released, these chemical messengers
migrate or ‘‘swim’’ through a process called diffusion
across the fluid-filled synapse. At the other side of the syn-
apse, the serotonin molecules become attached to receptors
on the surface of the postsynaptic nerve. This signal tells
the postsynaptic nerve to fire, as illustrated in Figure 17~2
on page 436.

Different kinds of nerves use different kinds of neuro-
transmitters. There are a great many of these neurotrans-
mitters in the brain. Chemically, many of them are
categorized as ‘‘biogenic amines’’ because they are man-
ufactured from amino acids in the foods we eat. These
amine transmitters are the brain’s biochemical messengers.

436 David D. Burns, M.D.

We're swimming
to the receptors!

Serotonin Receptors

Nerve Fires

This is
\ y STIMULATING!

Figure 17-2. The serotonin molecules become attached to the re-
ceptors on the postsynaptic nerve. This stimulates the nerve to fire.

Three of the amine transmitters in the limbic (emotional)
regions of the brain are called serotonin, norepinephrine,
and dopamine. These three transmitters have been theorized
to play a role in many psychiatric disorders and have been
intensively studied by psychiatric researchers. Because
these chemical messengers are called biogenic amines, the
theories linking them to depression or mania are sometimes
referred to as the biogenic amine theories. But we are get-
ting ahead of ourselves.

How does a chemical messenger cause the postsynaptic
nerve to fire once it becomes attached to the nerve? Let’s
imagine for a moment that the chemical transmitter in the
presynaptic nerve is serotonin. (I could have chosen any of
them, since they all work in a similar manner.) On the
surface of the postsynaptic nerve there are tiny areas called
‘‘serotonin receptors.’’ You can think of these receptors as
locks because they cannot be opened up without the right
key. These receptors are on the membranes that form the
outer surface of nerves. These nerve membranes are some-
thing like the skin that covers your body.

Now, think of the serotonin as the key to the lock on the

FEELING GOOD 437

Reuptake Pump We're swimming home now!

Our work is done!

Serotonin Recepto

Postsynaptic Nerve

Figure 17-3. The serotonin molecules swim back to the presynaptic
nerve where they are pumped back inside. Once inside, MAO de-
stroys them.

postsynaptic nerve. Just like a real key, the serotonin works
only because it has a specific shape. There are many other
chemicals floating around in the synaptic region, but they
will not open the serotonin lock because they do not have
the right molecular shape. Once the key fits into the lock,
the lock opens up. This triggers additional chemical reac-
tions that cause the postsynaptic nerve to fire electrically.
When the nerve fires, the serotonin (the key) is released
from the receptor (the lock) on the postsynaptic nerve and
ends in the synaptic fluid again. Finally, it ‘‘swims’’ back
to the presynaptic nerve (again, through a process called
diffusion), as illustrated in Figure 17—3 above.

The serotonin has done its job, and the presynaptic nerve
needs to get rid of it; otherwise it will hang around in the
synapse and it might swim back to the postsynaptic nerve
again. This could create confusion, because the postsynap-
tic nerve may think there is a new signal and it may get
stimulated to fire again.

To solve this problem, the presynaptic nerve has a pump
on its surface. Once the serotonin swims back, it attaches
to a receptor (another ‘‘lock’’) on the surface of the pre-
synaptic nerve and it is pumped back into the nerve by

438 David D. Burns, M.D.

something called the ‘‘membrane pump’’ or the ‘“‘reuptake
pump,’’ as you can see in Figure 17-3.

After the serotonin is pumped back inside, the presynap-
tic nerve can recycle it or it can destroy the excess serotonin
if it already has enough saved up for the next electrical
signal. It destroys the excess serotonin through a process
called ‘‘metabolism,’’ which means changing one chemical
into another chemical. In this case, the serotonin is changed
into a chemical that can be absorbed into the bloodstream.
The enzyme in the nerve that performs this service is called
monoamine oxidase, or MAO for short. The MAO enzyme
transforms the serotonin into a new chemical called ‘‘5-
hydroxyindoleacetic acid,’’ or S-HIAA. That is another big
name, but you can simply think of 5-HIAA as the waste
product of the serotonin. The 5-HIAA leaves your brain,
enters your bloodstream, and is carried to your kidneys.
Your kidneys remove the 5-HIAA from your blood and
send it to your bladder. Finally, you get rid of the 5-HIAA
when you urinate.

That’s the end of the serotonin cycle. Of course, the pre-
synaptic nerve must continually manufacture a new supply
of serotonin to use in nerve-firing so that the total amount
of serotonin does not get depleted.

What Goes Wrong in Depression?

First of all, let me reemphasize that scientists do not yet
know the cause of depression or any other psychiatric dis-
order. There are lots of interesting theories, but none of
them has yet been proven. One day, we may have the an-
swer and look back on the thinking of this era as a quaint
historical curiosity. However, science has to start some-
where, and research on the brain is moving forward at an
explosive rate. New and very different theories will un-
doubtedly emerge in the next decade.

The explanations in this section will be very simplified.
The brain is enormously complex and our knowledge about

FEELING GOOD 439

how it works is still extremely primitive. There is a vast
amount we do not know about the brain’s hardware and
software. How does the firing of a nerve or a series of
nerves get translated into a thought or a feeling? This is
one of the deepest mysteries of science, as amazing to me
as questions about the origin of the universe.

We won’t even attempt to answer those questions here;
for the moment, our goals are much more humble. If you
understood Figures 17—1 to 17-3, it should be pretty easy
for you to understand current theories about what goes
wrong in depression.

You have already learned that nerves in the brain send
messages to each other with chemical messengers called
neurotransmitters. You also know that some of the nerves
in the limbic system of the brain use serotonin, norepi-
nephrine, and dopamine as their chemical messengers.
Some scientists have hypothesized that depression may re-
sult from a deficiency of one or more of these biogenic
amine transmitter substances in the brain, while mania
(states of extreme euphoria or elation) may result from an
excess of one or more of them. Some researchers believe
that serotonin plays the most important role in depression
and mania; others believe that abnormalities in norepineph-
rine or dopamine also play a role.

A corollary of these biogenic amine theories is that an-
tidepressant drugs may work by boosting the levels or ac-
tivity of serotonin, norepinephrine, or dopamine in
depressed patients. We will talk some more about how
these drugs work in a little while.

What would happen if a chemical messenger such as
serotonin became depleted from the presynaptic nerve in
Figure 17-1? Then this nerve could not send its nerve sig-
nals properly across the synapses to the postsynaptic nerve.
The wiring in the brain would develop faulty connections,
and the result would be mental and emotional static, much
like the music that comes out of a radio with a loose wire
in the tuner. One type of emotional static (serotonin defi-

440 David D. Burns, M.D.

ciency) would cause depression, and another type of static
(serotonin excess) would cause mania.

Recently, these amine theories have been modified quite
a bit. Some scientists no longer believe that a deficiency or
excess Of serotonin causes depression or mania. Instead,
they postulate that abnormalities in one or more of the re-
ceptors on the nerve membranes may lead to mood abnor-
malities. Examine Figure 17—2 again, and imagine that
there is something wrong with the serotonin receptors on
the postsynaptic nerve. For example, there might not be
enough of them. What would happen to the communication
between the nerves? Although there might be plenty of se-
rotonin molecules in the synapse, the postsynaptic nerves
might not fire consistently when the presynaptic nerves
fired. And if there were too many serotonin receptors, this
could have the opposite effect of causing overactivity in the
serotonin system.

To date, at least fifteen different kinds of serotonin re-
ceptors have been identified throughout the brain and more
are being identified all the time. All these receptors prob-
ably have different effects on hormones, feelings, and be-
havior. Scientists do not have a very clear picture of what
any of these different receptors do, nor do they know if
abnormalities in any of them play a causal role in depres-
sion or mania. Research in this area is evolving at an ex-
tremely rapid pace, and we will have better information
about the physiologic and psychological effects of these
many serotonin receptors in the near future.

Although our knowledge about the role of serotonin re-
ceptors in brain function is still quite limited, there is evi-
dence that the number of receptors on the postsynaptic
nerves may change in response to antidepressant drug ther-
apy. For example, if you give a drug that boosts the levels
of serotonin in the synapses between the nerves, the number
of serotonin receptors on the postsynaptic nerve membranes
will decrease after a few weeks. This might be a way that
the nerves attempt to compensate for the excess stimula-
tion—the nerves are trying to turn down the volume of the

FEELING GOOD 441

signal, so to speak. This kind of reaction is called ‘‘down-
regulation.’’ In contrast, if you deplete the serotonin from
the presynaptic nerve in Figure 17—1, much less serotonin
will be released into the synapse. After several weeks, the
postsynaptic nerves may compensate by increasing the
number of serotonin receptors. The nerves are trying to turn
up the volume of the signal. This kind of reaction is called
“‘up-regulation.”’

Again, these are big words with simple meanings. ‘‘Up-
regulation’” means ‘‘more receptors,’ and ‘‘down-
regulation’? means ‘‘fewer receptors.’” We could also say
that up-regulation means turning the system up, and down-
regulation means turning the system down—yjust like a ra-
dio.

It is known that antidepressant drugs usually require sev-
eral weeks or more to become effective. Researchers have
been trying to figure out why. Some researchers have spec-
ulated that down-regulation may account for the antide-
pressant effects of these drugs. In other words,
antidepressants may work not because they boost the se-
rotonin system, as originally proposed, but because they
turn the serotonin system down after several weeks. This
would imply that decreased serotonin levels might not be
the cause of depression after all. Depression might instead
be due to increased serotonin activity in the brain. Anti-
depressant drugs may correct this after several weeks be-
cause they turn the serotonin system down.

How well established and proven are these theories? Not
at all. As I have suggested, it is awfully easy to make up
a theory, but much harder to prove it. To date, it has not
been possible to validate or disprove any of these theories
in a convincing way. In addition, there are no clinical or
laboratory tests we could give to groups of patients or to
individual patients that will reliably detect any chemical
imbalance that causes depression.

The main value of the current theories is to stimulate
research so that our knowledge of brain function will be-
come more sophisticated over time. Eventually, I believe

442 David D. Burns, M.D.

we will develop much more refined theories and far better
tools for testing them.

Now you may be thinking, ‘‘Is that all there is to it?’’
Do scientists just sit around and say, “‘Depression could be
due to an excess or a deficiency of this or that transmitter
or receptor in the brain?’’ On some level, that really is all
there is to it. Part of the problem is that our models of the
brain are still very primitive, and so our theories of de-
pression are not yet very sophisticated either.

It may turn out that depression is not due to problems
with any transmitter chemical or receptor. We may one day
discover that depression is actually more of a ‘‘software’’
problem, and not a ‘“‘hardware’’ problem. In other words,
if you have a computer, you know that computers crash all
the time. Sometimes this results from a problem with the
hardware. For example, your hard drive may become de-
fective. But more often, there’s a problem with the soft-
ware—a bug that makes the program work poorly in certain
situations. So with regard to brain research on depression,
we may be looking for a problem in the ‘“‘hardware’’ (for
example, a chemical imbalance we are born with) whereas
the real problem is in the “‘software’’ (for example, a neg-
ative thinking pattern based on learning). Both kinds of
problems would be ‘‘organic,’’ since brain tissue is in-
volved, but the solutions to them would be radically dif-
ferent.

Another major problem facing depression researchers is
the chicken-versus-the-egg dilemma. Are changes we mea-
sure in the brain the cause of the depression or the result?
To illustrate this problem, let’s conduct a thought experi-
ment involving a deer in a forest. The deer is happy and
contented. Imagine that we have a special machine that al-
lows us to visualize the chemical and electrical activity in
the deer’s brain. We might have, for example, a futuristic
portable brain imaging machine that can work from a dis-
tance, like the laser guns the police use to see how fast
you’re driving. However, the deer does not know we are
monitoring its brain activity. Suddenly, the deer spots a
pack of hungry wolves approaching. Panic strikes! Our

FEELING GOOD 443

brain imaging machine detects instantaneous massive
changes in the electrical and chemical activity in the deer’s
brain. Are these chemical and electrical changes the cause
of the fear or the result of the fear? Would we say the deer
is afraid because it has developed a sudden “‘chemical im-
balance’’ in its brain?

Similarly, there are all kinds of chemical and electrical
changes in the brains of depressed patients. Our brains
change quite dramatically when we feel happy, angry, or
frightened. Which brain changes result from the strong
emotions we feel, and which brain changes are the causes?
Separating cause from effect is one of the thorniest chal-
lenges facing depression researchers. This problem is not
impossible to solve, but it is not easy, and those eager to
endorse the current theories about depression do not always
acknowledge it.

Clearly, the research necessary to test any of these the-
ories can be daunting. One significant problem is that it is
still very difficult to get accurate information about the
chemical and electrical process in the human brain. We
can’t just open up the brain of a depressed individual and
look inside! And even if we could, we really wouldn’t
know where or how to look. But new tools, such as PET
(positron emission tomography) scanning and MRI (mag-
netic resonance imaging), do make such research possible.
For the first time, scientists can begin to ‘‘see’’ the activity
of nerves and chemical processes inside the brains of hu-
man beings. This research is still in its infancy, and we can
look forward to a great deal of progress in the next decade.

How Do Antidepressant Drugs Work?

The modern era of research on the chemistry of depres-
sion got a big boost accidentally in the early 1950s when
researchers were testing a new drug for tuberculosis called
iproniazid.' As it turned out, iproniazid was not an effective
treatment for tuberculosis. However, the investigators no-

444 David D. Burns, M.D.

ticed pronounced mood elevations in a number of patients
who received this drug, and hypothesized that iproniazid
might have antidepressant properties. This led to an explo-
sion of research by drug companies who wanted to be the
first to develop and market antidepressant drugs.

Researchers knew that iproniazid was an inhibitor of the
MAO enzyme discussed previously. The drug was therefore
categorized as an MAO inhibitor, or MAOI for short. Sev-
eral new MAOI drugs that were similar in chemical struc-
ture to iproniazid were developed. Two of them, phenylzine
(Nardil) and tranylcypromine (Parnate), are still in use to-
day. A third MAOI called selegiline (trade name Eldepryl)
has been approved for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease.
This drug is also occasionally used in the treatment of mood
disorders. Other new MAOIs in use abroad may eventually
be marketed in the United States.

The MAOIs are no longer prescribed nearly as frequently
as they used to be. This is because they can cause danger-
ous elevations of blood pressure if the patient combines
them with certain foods such as cheese. The MAOIs can
also cause toxic reactions when combined with certain
drugs. Because of these hazards, newer and safer antide-
pressants have been developed. These new drugs work
quite differently from the MAOIs. Nevertheless, the
MAOIs can be extremely helpful for some depressed pa-
tients who do not respond to other medications, and they
can be used safely if the patient and doctor follow a number
of guidelines that I will spell out in Chapter 20.

The iproniazid discovery helped to usher in a new era of
biological research on depression. Scientists were eager to
find out how the MAOIs worked. It was known that the
MAOIs prevented the breakdown of serotonin, norepineph-
rine, and dopamine, the three chemical messengers that are
concentrated in the limbic regions of the brain. Scientists
hypothesized that a deficiency in one or more of these sub-
stances might cause depression and that antidepressant
drugs might work by increasing the levels of these sub-

FEELING GOOD 445

stances. This is how the biogenic amine theories actually
Originated.

Now let’s see how much you’ve learned about how the
brain works. Look at Figures 17-1 to 17~3 again. When
the presynaptic nerve fires, serotonin is released into the
synapse. After it attaches to a receptor on the postsynaptic
nerve, it swims back to the presynaptic nerve, where it is
pumped back inside this nerve and destroyed by the MAO
enzyme. Now ask yourself this question: What would hap-
pen if we prevented the MAO enzyme from destroying the
serotonin?

As you have probably guessed, the serotonin would ac-
cumulate in the presynaptic nerve, because this nerve is
always manufacturing new serotonin. If this nerve could not
get rid of its serotonin, the concentration of serotonin in
the nerve would continue to increase. Whenever the pre-
synaptic nerve fired, it would release much more serotonin
than usual into the fluid-filled synaptic region. The excess
serotonin in the synapse would cause a greater-than-
expected stimulation of the postsynaptic nerve. This would
be the chemical equivalent of turning up the volume on the
radio. These effects of the MAOI antidepressants are illus-
trated in Figure 17-4 on page 446.

Could this be the reason the MAOI drugs cause a mood
elevation? This 1s possible, and scientists have hypothesized
that this is exactly how these MAOI drugs work. Research
studies have confirmed that when these MAOI drugs are
given to humans or animals, brain levels of serotonin, nor-
epinephrine, and dopamine do increase. However, it is not
known for certain if the antidepressant effects result from
an increase in one of these biogenic amines, or from some
other effect of these drugs on the brain.

Can you think of another theory about why or how these
MAOI drugs might work? Does the increase in mood have
to result from the extra stimulation of the postsynaptic
nerve, or could there be another possible explanation?
Think about what you read about down-regulation in the

446 David D. Burns, M.D.

We feel safe! MAO
can’t get us now!

Wow! It’s really getting
crowded in herel

Serotonin Receptors

Nerve Fires

neanememees at

Postsynaptic Nerve

Figure 17-4. MAOls block the MAO enzyme inside the presynaptic
nerve, so serotonin levels increase. The excess serotonin is re-
leased into the synaptic region whenever the nerve fires. This pro-
vides a stronger stimulation of the postsynaptic nerve.

previous section and see if you can come up with an answer
before you read any further.

You probably recall that the effects on the postsynaptic
nerves after several weeks can be the opposite of the effects
on these nerves when you first take a drug. All the extra
serotonin in the synapse may cause a down-regulation of
the postsynaptic serotonin receptors after several weeks,
and this down-regulation may correspond to the antide-
pressant effects. (Remember that although some scientists
think depression results from a serotonin deficiency, others
believe depression results from increased brain serotonin
activity.) If you thought of this, it shows you are really
learning your neurochemistry. You get an A-plus on this
pop quiz!

If you said that the antidepressant effects of the MAOI
drug could result from effects on some other system in the
brain, you also get an A-plus. These theories about how
the antidepressant drugs relieve depression are not proven
facts. The effects of the MAOIs on the brain are vastly
more complex than the simple model depicted in Figure
17-4. The effects of any antidepressant are probably not

FEELING GOOD 447

limited to one specific region or one specific type of nerve
in the brain. Remember that each nerve in the brain con-
nects with many thousands of other nerves, and all of them
in turn connect with thousands of others. When you take
an antidepressant, there are massive changes in numerous
chemical and electrical systems throughout your brain. Any
of these changes could be responsible for the improvement
in your mood. Trying to figure out exactly how these drugs
work is still a little like looking for a needle in a haystack.
But the important thing for the moment is that these drugs
do seem to help sonie depressed patients, regardless of how
or why they work.

As I have mentioned, many new and different kinds of
antidepressant drugs have been developed and marketed
since the 1950s. Unlike the MAOIs, the newer antidepres-
sants do not cause a buildup of transmitters like serotonin
in the presynaptic nerve depicted in Figure 17-4. Instead,
they mimic the effects of the brain’s natural transmitter sub-
stances by attaching to receptors on the surfaces of the pre-
synaptic or postsynaptic nerves.

To understand how these newer antidepressants can do
this, remember our analogy of the lock and the key. A
natural transmitter substance is like a key, and the receptor
on the surface of the nerve is like a lock. The key is able
to unlock the lock only because it has a certain shape. But
if you were a magician, like the famous Harry Houdini,
you could easily pick the lock and open it without the key.

An antidepressant medication is like a counterfeit key
that a drug company has manufactured. Because the chem-
ists know the three-dimensional shape of a natural trans-
mitter like serotonin, norepinephrine, or dopamine, they can
create new drugs that have a very similar shape. These
drugs will fit into the receptors on the surfaces of nerves
and mimic the effects of the natural transmitters. The brain
does not know that an antidepressant is in the lock—the
brain has been tricked into thinking that the natural trans-
mitter chemical is attached to the receptor on the surface
of the nerve.

448 David D. Burns, M.D.

In theory, the artificial key (the antidepressant) can do
one of two things when it becomes attached to the receptor.
It can either open the lock, or it can jam the lock without
actually opening it. Drugs that open the locks are called
‘‘agonists.’” Agonists are simply drugs that mimic the ef-
fects of the natural transmitters. Drugs that jam up these
locks are called ‘‘antagonists.’’ Antagonists block the ef-
fects of the natural transmitters and prevent them from be-
ing effective.

We can imagine several different ways that antidepres-
sant drugs could influence the receptors on the presynaptic
and postsynaptic nerves. For the purpose of this discussion,
imagine that the transmitter used by the presynaptic nerve
is serotonin, but the same considerations apply to any trans-
mitter. What would happen if we blocked the receptors on
the reuptake pump? The presynaptic nerve could no longer
pump the serotonin from the synapse back inside. Each
time the nerve fired, more and more serotonin would be
released into the synaptic region. As a result, the synapse
would get flooded with serotonin.

This is precisely how most of the currently prescribed
antidepressants work. As you can see in Figure 17-5 on
page 449, they block the receptors for the reuptake pumps
On presynaptic nerves, and so the transmitters build up in
the synaptic region. The end result of this process is similar
to the effects of giving the MAOI drugs discussed above.
In both instances, the levels of serotonin build up in the
synaptic region. When the presynaptic nerve fires, more
serotonin than normal will ‘‘swim’’ to the postsynaptic
nerve and stimulate it to fire. Once again, we have ‘‘turned
up’’ the serotonin system, so to speak.

Is this good? Is this why these antidepressant drugs can
improve our moods? That’s the current theory, but no one
really knows the answers to this question yet.

Different antidepressants block different amine pumps
and some of them have more specific effects than others.
The older ‘‘tricyclic’’ antidepressants, such as amitriptyline
(Elavil) or imipramine (Tofranil) and others, block the

FEELING GOOD 449

I can’t get back inside!

Reuptake pump is blocked

©
SOQ” ©
@)
© ©
Q2@Q2e6 ©

Presynaptic Nerve @)

Eo

Figure 17-5. Most antidepressants block the reuptake pumps, so
serotonin remains in the synapse after the nerve fires. Because se-
rotonin builds up in the synaptic region, the stimulation of the post-
synaptic nerve is stronger.

reuptake pumps for serotonin and norepinephrine. (Tri-
cyclic means ‘‘three wheels,’’ like a tricycle, because the
chemical structure of these drugs resembles three linked
rings.) Therefore, these transmitters build up in the brain if
you take one of these drugs. Some tricyclic antidepressants
have relatively stronger effects on the serotonin pump, and
some of them have relatively stronger effects on the nor-
epinephrine pump. Drugs with stronger effects on the se-
rotonin pump are called ‘“‘serotonergic’’ and drugs with
relatively stronger effects on the norepinephrine pump are
called “‘noradrenergic.’’ What do you think we would call
a drug with a strong effect on the dopamine pump? If you
guessed ‘“‘dopaminergic,’’ you would be correct!

Some of the newer antidepressants, such as fluoxetine
(Prozac), differ from the older tricyclic compounds in that
they have highly selective and specific effects on the se-
rotonin pump. If we want to use one of our new words, we
can say that Prozac is highly ‘‘serotonergic’’ because levels
of serotonin will build up in the brain when you take it.
However, because Prozac blocks only the serotonin pump,
the levels of other transmitters, such as norepinephrine and

450 David D. Burns, M.D.

dopamine, will not build up. Prozac is classified as a selec-
tive serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI for short) because
of its selective and specific effects on the serotonin pump.
Again, SSRI is an intimidating name with a humble mean-
ing. SSRI means, “‘this drug blocks only, the serotonin
pump and it doesn’t block any other pumps.’’ Five SSRIs
are currently prescribed in the United States and I will dis-
cuss them in detail in Chapter 20.

Some new antidepressants are not so selective—they
block more than one type of reuptake pump. For example,
venlafaxine (Effexor) blocks the serotonin and norepineph-
rine pumps, so it has been called a dual reuptake inhibitor.
The drug company that manufactures venlafaxine promotes
the idea that this drug may be more effective because the
levels of two transmitters (serotonin and norepinephrine)
increase, rather than just one. Actually, this is not such a
novel feature. As you just learned, most of the older (and
much cheaper) antidepressants do exactly the same thing.
In addition, there is no evidence that venlafaxine works any
better or any faster than the older drugs. However, venla-
faxine has fewer side effects than some of the older tricyclic
antidepressants. This might justify the increased cost of
venlafaxine in some instances.

So far you have learned about the MAOIs and the pump
inhibitors, such as the tricyclics and the SSRIs. Are there
any other ways that antidepressant drugs might work? If
you were a chemist working for a drug company and you
wanted to create a completely novel antidepressant, what
kinds of effects would your new drug have? One possibility
would be to create a drug that directly stimulated the se-
rotonin receptors on the postsynaptic nerves. A drug like
this would mimic the effect of the natural serotonin. It
would be a kind of counterfeit serotonin. Buspirone
(BuSpar) works like this. This drug directly stimulates se-
rotonin receptors on postsynaptic nerves. Buspirone was
marketed a number of years ago as the first nonaddictive
drug for anxiety, but it also has some mild antidepressant
effects. However, its antidepressant and antianxiety prop-

FEELING GOOD 451

Hey, someone is blocking my
receptor. This is unfair!

Serotonin receptors
are blocked

Postsynaptic Nerve

Figure 17-6. Serotonin antagonists block the serotonin receptors
on the postsynaptic nerve, so the serotonin cannot stimulate the
postsynaptic nerve after the presynaptic nerve fires.

erties are not especially strong. As a result, buspirone has
not emerged as a particularly popular drug for anxiety or
depression.

Why is it that buspirone is not more effective for de-
pression? Scientists don’t actually know the answer. Re-
member, though, that there are at least fifteen different
kinds of serotonin receptors throughout the brain. All of
these receptors have different functions that are not yet
fully understood. Perhaps drugs that stimulated different
kinds of serotonin receptors would have stronger antide-
pressant effects. As you might have gathered, things get
complicated fairly quickly as we learn more and more about
how the brain works.

If you were a drug company chemist, you could also
create drugs that blocked the serotonin receptors on the
postsynaptic nerves, as illustrated in Figure 17-6 above.
Because such drugs would prevent the natural serotonin
from having its effects, they would theoretically make de-
pression worse. In fact, drugs that block serotonin receptors
have been created. Two of them are called nefazodone (Ser-
zone) and trazodone (Desyrel). Although they are catego-

452 David D. Burns, M.D.

rized as ‘‘serotonin antagonists,’’ these drugs are also used
as antidepressants.

Some drugs have complex effects on several kinds of
pre- and postsynaptic nerve receptors. Mirtazapine (Reme-
ron) is another new antidepressant that has been available
in the United States since 1996. Mirtazapine appears to
block serotonin receptors on the postsynaptic nerves, but it
also stimulates receptors on presynaptic nerves that use nor-
epinephrine as a transmitter. This causes an increase in the
release of norepinephrine by these nerves. So when you
take mirtazapine, the serotonin system gets turned down
and the norepinephrine system gets turned up.

The antidepressant effects of nefazodone, trazodone, and
mirtazapine are exactly the opposite of what you might pre-
dict from the serotonin theory. Although they turn the se-
rotonin system off, they are antidepressants. How can this
be possible? If you are starting to get confused, join the
club! Remember that there are many types of serotonin re-
ceptors in the brain and they all have different kinds of
effects. Remember, too, that there are many high-speed and
complex interactions among the different circuits in the
brain. When we perturb one system of nerves in One region
of the brain, we almost instantly create changes in
thousands or millions of other nerves in other regions of
the brain. In the final analysis, even the world’s top neu-
roscientists do not have a very clear understanding of why
or how these drugs relieve depression.

In summary, most of the currently prescribed antidepres-
sants have effects on the serotonin, norepinephrine, or do-
pamine systems. Some of them are highly selective for one
transmitter system, and others have effects on many trans-
mitter systems. However, the effects of the currently pre-
scribed antidepressants on these three systems do not really
account for their beneficial effects in a very consistent or
convincing way. For example, you have learned that some
antidepressants stimulate serotonin levels, some of them
block serotonin receptors, and some of them seem to have
no effects at all on serotonin. And yet they all work about

FEELING GOOD 453

equally well. Clearly, the models I have drawn in Figures
17-4 to 17-6 are overly simplified, and current theories
about how antidepressant medications work appear to be
incomplete at best.

I do not mean to sound overly negative. Keep in mind
that I am not challenging the effectiveness of the currently
prescribed antidepressant drugs; I am simply saying that our
theories about how these drugs work do not account for all
the facts.

Fortunately, most neuroscience researchers now ac-
knowledge this. The focus of research has expanded
greatly. Instead of focusing narrowly on levels of one or
another biogenic amine, researchers are pursuing a wide
variety of strategies which focus on regulatory mechanisms
throughout the brain, and new theories have been proposed.
These theories deal with other transmitters in the brain, or
with a variety of pre- or postsynaptic receptors, or with
“‘second messenger’ systems within the nerves, or with ion
flux across nerve membranes, as well as with neuroendo-
crine systems, immune systems, and biological rhythm ab-
normalities. I believe the wider net that has now been cast
will eventually lead to much better understanding of how
the brain regulates moods.

Sophistication in brain research has accelerated tremen-
dously and will accelerate even more rapidly in the next
decade. This research will hopefully lead to improvements
such as these:

¢ clinical tests for the chemical imbalance that causes
depression (if, indeed, such an imbalance actually ex-
ists);

* tests to detect the genetic abnormalities that make cer-

tain individuals more vulnerable to depression as well

as manic-depressive illness;

safer medications with fewer side effects—as you will

learn in Chapter 20, significant advances have already

been made in this area;

454 David D. Burns, M.D.

¢ drugs and psychotherapeutic treatments that are more
effective and faster-acting;

¢ drugs and psychotherapeutic treatments that minimize
or entirely prevent relapses of depression following re-
covery.

Although our current level of understanding is still prim-
itive, an important scientific effort has been launched. One
day this effort may even lead us to the identification of the
mysterious ‘‘black bile.”’

Chapter 18

The Mind-Body Problem

(Notes and References appear on pages 682-687.)

Ever since the time of the French philosopher, René Des-
cartes, scholars have been puzzled by the ‘‘mind-body
problem.’’ This is the idea that as human beings we have
at least two separate levels of existence—our minds and
our bodies. Our minds consist of our thoughts and our feel-
ings, which are invisible or ethereal. We know they are
there because we can experience them, but we do not know
why or how they exist.

In contrast, our bodies consist of tissue—blood, bones,
muscle, fat, and so forth. The tissue ultimately consists of
molecules, and the molecules are ultimately made up of
atoms. These building blocks are inert—presumably, atoms
have no consciousness. So how can the inert tissue in our
brains give rise to our conscious minds, which can see, feel,
hear, love, and hate?

According to Descartes, our minds and bodies must be
connected in some manner. Descartes called the portion of
the brain that links these two separate entities the “‘seat of
the soul.’’ For centuries, philosophers have tried to locate
the ‘‘seat of the soul.’’ In the modern era, neuroscientists
continue this search as they attempt to figure out how our
brains create emotions and conscious thoughts.

The belief that our minds and bodies are separate is re-

455

456 David D. Burns, M.D.

flected in our treatments for problems such as depression.
We have biological treatments, which work on the ‘‘body,”’
and psychological treatments, which work on the ‘‘mind.”’
Biological treatments usually involve medications, and psy-
chological treatments usually involve some type of talking
therapy.

There is often intense competition between the ‘‘drug
therapy’? camp and the ‘“‘talking therapy’’ camp. On the
average, psychiatrists are more likely to be in the drug ther-
apy camp. This is because psychiatrists are first trained as
physicians (M.D.s). They can prescribe medications, and
they are more likely to be influenced by the medical model
of diagnosis and treatment. If you are depressed and you
go to a psychiatrist, there’s a good chance that she or he
will tell you that your depression is caused by a chemical
imbalance in your brain, and will recommend treatment
with an antidepressant medication. If your family physician
treats your depression, drug treatment is also very likely.
This is because many family physicians have little training
in psychotherapy and very little time to talk to patients
about the problems in their lives.

In contrast, psychologists, clinical social workers, and
other types of counselors are more likely to be in the talking
therapy camp. They do not have medical training and can-
not prescribe medications.” Their education usually focuses
more on the psychological and social factors that may cause
depression. If you are depressed and you go to a therapist
in the talking therapy camp, she or he is more likely to
focus on your upbringing, your attitudes, or stressful events
such as the loss of love or the loss of your job. Your ther-
apist will probably also recommend psychotherapeutic
treatment, such as cognitive behavioral therapy. However,
there are many exceptions to this generalization. Many non-
medical therapists believe that biological factors do play a
role in depression, and many psychiatrists are gifted psy-
chotherapists. Psychiatrists and nonmedical therapists
sometimes work together in teams so that their patients can
benefit from both types of treatment.

FEELING GOOD 457

Nevertheless, the split between the mind (psychological)
and body (biological) schools is sharp, and the dialogue
between them is often intense, combative, and bitter. Po-
litical and financial considerations sometimes seem to in-
fluence the tone of these discussions more than scientific
findings. Some recent studies suggest that these arguments
may amount to much ado about nothing and that the di-
chotomy between the mind and the brain may be illusory.
These studies indicate that antidepressant drugs and psy-
chotherapy may have similar effects on our minds and on
our brains—in other words, they might work in the same
way.

For example, in a classic study published in the Archives
of General Psychiatry in 1992, Drs. Lewis R. Baxter, Jr.,
Jeffrey M. Schwartz, Kenneth S. Bergman, and their col-
leagues at UCLA School of Medicine studied changes in
the brain chemistry of eighteen patients with obsessive-
compulsive disorder (OCD). Half of these patients were
treated with cognitive behavioral therapy (and no drugs)
and half were treated with antidepressant drugs (and no
psychotherapy).* The patients in the no-drug group received
individual and group psychotherapy that had two main
components. The first component was exposure and re-
sponse prevention. This is a behavior therapy technique
which involves encouraging patients not to give in to their
compulsive urges to check locks, to wash their hands re-
peatedly, and so forth. The second component was cogni-
tive therapy along the lines described in this book.
Remember that patients in this group did not receive any
medications at all.

These investigators used positron emission tomography
(PET scanning) to study the metabolic rate for sugar (glu-
cose) in various brain regions before and after ten weeks
of treatment with either drugs or psychotherapy. This
method of brain scanning assesses the activity of the nerves
in different areas of the brain. One brain region they were
particularly interested in was the caudate nucleus on the
right half of the brain.

458 David D. Burns, M.D.

Both treatments were effective: the majority of patients
in both groups improved, and there were no significant dif-
ferences in the two treatments. This was not surprising;
previous researchers have also reported that drugs and cog-
nitive behavioral psychotherapy have similar effects in the
treatment of OCD. However, the results of the PET study
were quite surprising. The investigators reported compara-
ble reductions in the activity in the right caudate nucleus
in the successfully treated patients regardless of whether
they were treated with drugs and no psychotherapy, or psy-
chotherapy and no drugs. In addition, the symptoms and
thinking patterns of the two groups improved to a similar
degree—neither treatment was superior. Finally, the
amount of improvement in symptoms was significantly cor-
related with the degree of change in the right caudate nu-
cleus. In other words, patients who improved the most had,
on average, the greatest reductions in brain activity in the
right caudate nucleus. The reduced activity meant that the
nerves in this region of the brain had calmed down, re-
gardless of whether they were treated with drugs or psy-
chotherapy.

One implication of this study is that excessive activity in
the right caudate nucleus might play a role in the devel-
Opment or maintenance of the symptoms of obsessive-
compulsive disorder. A second important implication is that
antidepressant medications and cognitive behavioral ther-
apy might be equally effective in restoring the structure and
function of the brain back to normal.

Like most published studies, this one had some fairly
significant flaws. One problem is that any brain changes
you observe in a particular psychiatric disorder might sim-
ply represent ‘‘downstream’’ effects rather than true causal
effects. In other words, the increased neural activity in the
right caudate nuclei of patients with obsessive-compulsive
disorder might simply reflect a more general pattern of dis-
tress throughout the brain and may not be the cause of the
symptoms, as we have discussed above.

Another problem was that the number of patients studied

FEELING GOOD 459

was extremely small, and the number of brain regions the
investigators studied was fairly large, so it is possible—
even likely—that these findings were the result of chance.
This possibility is consistent with the fact that other inves-
tigators have reported different patterns of brain activity in
patients treated with antidepressant medications. This is
why replications with more patients conducted by indepen-
dent investigators are needed before the results of any study
can be accepted. In spite of these limitations, the report by
Dr. Baxter and his colleagues was the first of its kind and
may open the door to an important new type of integrated
research on the ways that drugs and psychotherapy can in-
fluence brain function and emotions.

Other studies have shown that antidepressants may ac-
tually work by helping depressed patients change their neg-
ative thinking patterns. Indeed, in an_ investigation
conducted at Washington University School of Medicine in
St. Louis, Drs. Anne D. Simons, Sol L. Garfield, and
George E. Murphy randomly assigned depressed patients to
treatment with either antidepressants alone or cognitive
therapy alone. They studied changes in the negative think-
ing patterns of both groups of patients. They discovered
that the negative thinking of patients who responded to the
antidepressants improved as much as the negative thinking
of depressed patients who responded to the cognitive ther-
apy.* Remember that the drug patients received no psycho-
therapy and the cognitive therapy patients received no
medications. Thus this study indicated that antidepressant
drugs change negative thinking patterns in much the same
way that cognitive therapy does. The effect of antidepres-
sant drugs on attitudes and thoughts may explain their an-
tidepressant effects just as well or even better than more
biological explanations of their effects on different trans-
mitter systems in the brain.

These remarkable studies suggest that we might do better
to let go of this ‘‘mind-body’’ split and begin to think about
how these different treatments may be working in tandem
on the mind and on the brain. This combined approach

460 David D. Burns, M.D.

could foster a greater sense of teamwork among therapists
and researchers approaching the problem from different an-
gles and may lead to more rapid advances in our under-
standing of emotional disorders. Even if there is some type
of genetic or biological disorder in at least some depres-
sions, psychotherapy can often help to correct these prob-
lems, even without medications. Many research studies, as
well as my own clinical experience, have confirmed that
severely depressed patients who appear very ‘‘biologi-
cally’’ depressed with lots of physical symptoms often re-
spond rapidly to cognitive therapy alone without any
drugs.°

It can work the other way as well. I have worked with
many depressed patients who were still stuck after I had
tried numerous psychotherapeutic interventions. When I
prescribed an antidepressant medication, many of these pa-
tients started to turn the corner, and the psychotherapy be-
gan to work better. It seemed as if the medication really
did help them change their negative thinking patterns as
they recovered from the depression.

if Depression Is Inherited, Doesn't It Mean
We Should Treat It with Drugs?

In Chapter 17 we talked about the fact that we don’t yet
know how strong the genetic influences are in the more
common forms of depression that do not involve mania.
But suppose scientists eventually discover that nearly all
forms of depression are inherited, at least in part. Would it
mean we should treat depression with drugs?

The answer is: not necessarily. For example, a blood
phobia is thought to be at least partially genetic, but it can
nearly always be treated quickly and easily with behavior
therapy. The treatment of choice for most phobias is to
expose the person to the frightening situation and to urge
them to face it and endure the anxiety until the fear dimin-
ishes and disappears. Most patients are so frightened that

FEELING GOOD 46!

they resist the treatment at first, but if they can be persuaded
to hang in there, the success rate is extraordinarily high.

I can attest to this personally. While growing up, I was
terrified of blood. When, in medical school, it was time to
draw blood from each other’s arms, I felt so unenthusiastic
that I dropped out of medical school. For the next year, I
decided to work in the clinical laboratory of the Stanford
University Hospital so I could try to get over my fear. They
gave me a job doing nothing but drawing blood out of
people’s arms and I had to do this all day long. The first
few times I had to draw blood, it made me very anxious,
but after those initial anxious moments, I got used to it.
Pretty soon, I loved my new job. This shows that at least
some genetic tendencies can respond to a behavioral treat-
ment without drugs.

To state an even more commonplace example, we all
inherit a tendency to have a particular type of body. Some
of us are genetically taller or shorter than others. Some of
us have larger frames, others have smaller frames. But our
diets and habits hugely influence the types of bodies we
have as adults. Many professional bodybuilders were
skinny and embarrassed about their looks when growing
up. This motivated them to go to the gym and work out.
This intense effort transformed many of them into cham-
pions. Their genes may have greatly influenced what they
were born with, but their behaviors and determination dom-
inated where they ended up.

The opposite is also true. If it turned out that depression
was entirely caused by the environment and that there were
no genetic influences, this would not minimize the potential
value of antidepressant drugs. For example, if you are ex-
posed to someone with a strep throat, you may get a strep
throat because streptococcal bacteria are so infectious. We
can say that the causes of your strep throat are almost en-
tirely environmental and not genetic. Nevertheless, we
would still treat your strep throat with an antibiotic, and
not with behavior therapy!

With regard to bipolar manic-depressive illness, the an-

462 David D. Burns, M.D.

swer is clear. This disorder appears to have an extremely
strong biological cause, and although we don’t yet know
exactly what this cause may be, treatment with a mood
stabilizer such as lithium or valproic acid (Depakene) is
usually a must. Other medications will also be used during
episodes of depression or severe mania. However, good
psychotherapy can also make a big contribution in the treat-
ment of bipolar illness. In my experience, the combination
of a drug like lithium or valproic acid along with cognitive
therapy has been far more effective than treatment with
medications alone.

From a practical point of view, the question I face as a
clinician is this: How can I best treat each particular patient
who is suffering from depression, regardless of the cause?
Whether or not genes play a role, drugs can sometimes help
and psychotherapy can sometimes help. Sometimes, a com-
bination of psychotherapy and antidepressant medications
seems to be the best approach.

Is It Better to Be Treated with Drugs
or Psychotherapy?

A number of studies have compared the effectiveness of
antidepressant drug treatment with cognitive therapy.°—* On
the whole, these studies have indicated that during the acute
phase of treatment, when patients first seek treatment for
their depressions, both treatments seem to work reasonably
well. Following recovery, the picture is a little different.
Several long-term studies indicate that patients who receive
cognitive therapy, alone or in combination with antidepres-
sant medications, appear to stay undepressed longer than
patients who receive only antidepressant medication ther-
apy and no psychotherapy.° This is probably because cog-
nitively treated patients have learned many coping tools to
help them to deal with any mood problems they might ex-
perience in the future.

If you would like to learn more about recent research on

FEELING GOOD 463

the effectiveness of drugs versus psychotherapy, you can
read an excellent article on this topic by Drs. David O.
Antonuccio and William G. Danton from the University of
Nevada and Dr. Gurland Y. DeNelsky from the Cleveland
Clinic.” These authors reviewed the world research litera-
ture on the effectiveness of psychotherapy versus medica-
tions for depression and came up with some rather startling
conclusions that are quite different from the popular per-
ceptions about these treatments. They argue that cognitive
therapy appears to be at least as effective, if not more ef-
fective, than medications in the treatment of depression.
They conclude that this is even true for severe depressions
that appear to be ‘‘biological’’ because they have many
physical side effects such as fatigue or a loss of interest in
sex. The authors also question the methods used by drug
companies to test new antidepressants. This scholarly and
provocative article is clearly written, so look it up if you
are curious.

My own clinical experience has convinced me that pure
‘‘test-tube treatment’’ with drugs alone is not the answer
for most patients. There appears to be a definite role for
effective psychological interventions, even if you have had
the good fortune to respond to an antidepressant medica-
tion. If you learn cognitive therapy self-help techniques like
those described in this book, I believe you will be better
prepared to cope with any mood problems that develop
again in the future.

My clinical practice has always been predicated on an
integrated approach. At my clinic in Philadelphia, approx-
imately 60 percent of our patients received cognitive ther-
apy with no drugs, and approximately 40 percent of our
patients received a combination of cognitive therapy along
with antidepressants. Patients in both groups did well, and
we found both types of treatment tools to be valuable. We
did not treat patients with drugs alone and no psychother-
apy because in my experience this approach has not been
satisfactory.

It may be that for certain types of depression, the addi-

464 David D. Burns, M.D.

tion of the proper antidepressant to help your treatment pro-
gram might make you more amenable to a rational self-help
program and greatly speed up the therapy. As I have men-
tioned earlier above, I can think of many depressed indi-
viduals who seemed to ‘‘see the light’’ with regard to their
illogical, twisted, negative thoughts more rapidly once they
began taking an antidepressant. My own philosophy is this:
I’m in favor of any reasonably safe tool that will help you!

I believe that your feelings about the type of treatment
that you receive may be important to the outcome. If you
are more biologically oriented, you may do better with drug
treatment. In contrast, if you are more psychologically ori-
ented, you may do better with psychotherapy. If you and
your therapist do not see eye to eye, you may lose confi-
dence and resist the treatment, and this can reduce the
chances for a successful result. In contrast, if the treatment
makes sense to you, you will feel more hope, trust and
confidence in your doctor. Consequently your chances for
a positive outcome will be increased.

I have also seen that certain negative attitudes and irra-
tional thoughts can interfere with proper drug treatment or
with psychotherapeutic treatment. I would like to expose
twelve hurtful myths at this time. The first eight myths con-
cern medication treatment and the last four myths concern
psychotherapy. With regard to medications, I believe that
enlightened caution in taking any drug is well advised, but
an excessively conservative attitude based on half-truths
can be equally destructive. I also believe that one should
be appropriately skeptical and cautious about psychother-
apy, but that too much pessimism can also interfere with
effective treatment.

Myth Number 1. ‘‘If I take this drug, I won’t be my
true self. Pll act strange and feel unusual.’’ Nothing could
be further from the truth. Although these drugs can some-
times eliminate depression, they do not usually create ab-
normal mood elevations and, except in rare cases, they will
not make you feel abnormal, strange, or ‘‘high.’’ In fact, many

FEELING GOOD 465

patients report that they feel much more like themselves
after they take an antidepressant medication.

Myth Number 2. ‘‘These drugs are extremely danger-
ous.’’ Wrong. If you are receiving medical supervision and
cooperate with your doctor, you will have no reason to fear
most antidepressant drugs. Adverse reactions are rare and
can usually be safely and effectively managed when you
and your doctor work together as a team. The antidepres-
sants are far safer than the depression itself. After all, de-
pression, if left untreated, can kill—through suicide!

This does not mean you should be complacent about an-
tidepressant drugs—or any drug you take, for that matter,
including aspirin. In the following chapters, you will learn
about the side effects and toxic effects of all the different
antidepressants and mood-stabilizing agents. If you are tak-
ing one or more of these drugs, educate yourself and read
about them in Chapter 20. This should not be difficult, and
the information will enhance your chances of having a safe
and effective experience with the antidepressant your doc-
tor has prescribed.

Myth Number 3. ‘‘But the side effects will be intoler-
able.’’ No, the side effects are mild and can usually be
made barely noticeable by adjusting the dose properly. If
in spite of this you find the medication uncomfortable, you
can usually switch to another medication that will be
equally effective with fewer side effects.

Remember, too, that untreated depression also has many
“‘side effects.’’ These include feelings of tiredness, in-
creases or decreases in appetite, difficulties sleeping, a loss
of motivation and energy, a loss of interest in sex, and so
forth. And if you respond favorably to an antidepressant,
these ‘‘side effects’’ will usually disappear.

Myth Number 4. ‘‘But I’m bound to get out of control
and use these drugs to commit suicide.’’ Some of the an-
tidepressant drugs do have a lethal potential if you take

466 David D. Burns, M.D.

them in overdose or combine them with certain other drugs,
but this need not be a problem if you discuss your concerns
with your physician. If you feel actively suicidal, it might
be helpful to obtain only a few days’ or one week’s supply
at a time. Then you will not be likely to have a lethal supply
on hand. Your doctor may also decide to treat you with
one of the newer antidepressant drugs that are much safer
than the older antidepressants if taken in accidental or in-
tentional overdose. Remember that as the drug begins to
work, you will feel less suicidal. You should also see your
therapist frequently and receive intensive therapy, either as
an outpatient or as an inpatient, until any suicidal urges
have passed.

Myth Number 5. ‘‘?ll become hooked and addicted,
like the junkies on the street. If I ever try to go off the
drug, I’Il fall apart again. I’Il be stuck with this crutch for-
ever.’ Wrong again. Unlike sleeping pills, opiates, barbi-
turates, and minor tranquilizers (benzodiazepines), the
addictive potential of antidepressants is extremely low.
Once the drug is working, you will not need to take larger
doses to maintain the antidepressant effect. As noted above,
if you are learning cognitive therapy techniques and focus-
ing on relapse prevention, in most instances your depres-
sion will not return when you discontinue the drug.

When it is time to go off the medicine, it would be ad-
visable to do this gradually, tapering off over a week or
two. This will minimize any discomfort that might occur
from abruptly stopping the medicine, and will help you nip
any relapse in the bud before it becomes full blown.

Many doctors now advocate long-term maintenance ther-
apy for patients with severe depressions that return on many
occasions. A prophylactic effect can sometimes be achieved
if you take the antidepressant over a period of a year or
two after you have recovered. That can minimize the prob-
ability of your depression returning. If you have had a sig-
nificant problem with recurrences of depression over a
period of years, this might be a wise step for you. But you

FEELING GOOD 467

should be reassured that antidepressant drugs are definitely
not addictive. In my practice through the years, I have had
very few patients who had to remain on antidepressant
drugs for more than a year, and almost no patients who
stayed on antidepressants indefinitely.

Myth-Number 6. ‘‘I won’t take any psychiatric drug
because that would mean I was crazy.’’ This is quite mis-
leading. Antidepressants are given for depression, not for
‘‘craziness.’’ If your doctor recommends an antidepressant,
this would indicate he or she is convinced you have a mood
problem. It does not mean that she or he thinks you are
crazy. However, it is crazy to refuse an antidepressant on
this basis because you may bring about greater misery and
suffering for yourself. Paradoxically, you may feel normal
more quickly with the help of the medicine.

Myth Number 7. ‘‘But other people are bound to look
down on me if I take an antidepressant. They’Il think I’m
inferior.’’ This fear is unrealistic. Other people will not
know you’re taking an antidepressant unless you tell them—
there’s no other way they could know. If you do tell some-
one, they’re more likely to feel relieved. If they care about
you, they’ll probably think more of you because you’re
doing something to help eliminate your painful mood dis-
order.

Of course, it is possible that someone might question you
about the advisability of taking a drug, or even criticize
your decision. This will give you the golden opportunity to
learn to cope with disapproval and criticism along the lines
discussed in Chapter 6. Sooner or later, you’re going to
have to decide to believe in yourself and stop giving in to
the disabling terror that someone might or might not agree
with something you do.

Myth Number 8. ‘‘It is shameful to have to take a pill.
I should be able to eliminate the depression on my own.”’

468 David D. Burns, M.D.

Research on mood disorders conducted throughout the
world has clearly shown that many individuals can recover
without pills if they engage in an active, structured, self-
help program of the type outlined in this book.* ?-'%

However, it is also clear that psychotherapy does not
work for everyone, and that some depressed patients re-
cover faster with the help of an antidepressant. In addition,
in many cases an antidepressant can facilitate your efforts
to help yourself, as described above.

Does it really make sense to mope and suffer endlessly,
stubbornly insisting you must “‘do it on your own’’ without
a medication? Obviously, you must do it yourself—with or
without a pharmacological boost. An antidepressant may
give you that little edge you need to begin to cope in a
more productive manner. This can accelerate the natural
healing process.

Myth Number 9. ‘‘T feel so severely depressed and
overwhelmed that only a drug could help me.’’ Drugs and
psychotherapy both have a lot to offer in the treatment of
severe depression. I believe that the passive attitude of let-
ting a drug do it for you is unwise. My own research has
indicated that the willingness to do something to help your-
self can have powerful antidepressant effects, whether or
not you are also taking a medication. The self-help work
patients complete between sessions also seems to speed re-
covery.'* '° So if you combine a medication with a good
form of psychotherapy, you will have more weapons in
your arsenal.

As I have already stated, many patients I have treated
with drugs alone did not recover completely. When I added
the cognitive therapy, many of them improved. I believe
that the combination of drugs and psychotherapy can work
better and quicker than drugs alone and frequently leads to
better long-term results. This seems to be true for mildly
depressed patients and for severely depressed patients as
well. For example, we treat many severely depressed in-
patients at the Stanford University Hospital with group cog-

FEELING GOOD 469

nitive therapy techniques. These techniques are similar to
the ones you have learned about in this book. We have
found that the group format can be especially helpful. I
have seen many of these patients improve significantly dur-
ing these therapy groups. The improvement often occurs
within the actual therapy group. At the moment the patient
sees how to talk back to his or her negative thoughts in a
convincing manner, there is often a strong, immediate uplift
in mood and outlook. Keep in mind that these inpatients
also receive antidepressant drugs that their attending psy-
chiatrists prescribe for them. So nearly all of them receive
a combination of drugs and psychotherapy—we are not
purists devoted only to one approach or the other.

I can recall one woman who was so severely depressed
that she would burst into tears almost every time she tried
to speak. If you even looked at her, it seemed it was enough
to trigger an outburst of uncontrollable sobbing. I asked
what she was thinking about when she was sobbing. She
said she was thinking about something that her psychiatrist
told her. He said her depression was ‘‘biological’’ and the
causes were genetic. She concluded that if the depression
was genetic, it meant she must have passed it down to her
children and her grandchildren. One of her sons was, in
fact, having a hard time. She attributed this to his ‘‘de-
pression gene’’ and blamed herself for ruining his life. She
castigated herself for even having gotten married and given
birth to children in the first place and felt certain they would
all endure horrible suffering forever. As she explained this,
she began sobbing again.

Now from your perspective, her self-blame may seem
incredibly unrealistic. Her insistence that all her children
and grandchildren would lead lives of endless and irrevers-
ible suffering may seem equally unrealistic. But from her
perspective, all her self-criticisms seemed entirely justified
and negative predictions seemed completely valid. Her self-
loathing and suffering were incredibly intense.

After she stopped crying, I asked what she would say to
another depressed woman with children. Would she be so

470 David D. Burns, M.D.

hard on her? This intervention did not work. She did not
even seem to comprehend what I said. Instead of answering
my question, she sobbed so uncontrollably that her entire
body shook as the tears streamed down her cheeks.

After a while she stopped crying again. I asked if two
other patients would volunteer to do a role-play to help her
out. I call this exercise “‘externalization of voices’’ because
you verbalize the negative thoughts in your mind and learn
to talk back to them. I wanted the other patients to illustrate
how she might talk back to her own negative thoughts so
that all she would have to do was watch. I told her to
imagine that these other women were very similar to her.
They were depressed and had children and grandchildren.

The first volunteer played the role of the negative part
of her mind and said out loud the sort of things the de-
pressed woman had been thinking: ‘‘If my depression is
partly genetic, then it means I am to blame for my son’s
depression.’’ The second volunteer played the role of the
more positive, realistic, self-loving part of her mind. This
volunteer talked back to the negative thought along these
lines: ‘‘I certainly wouldn’t blame another depressed
woman for her son’s depression, so it makes no sense to
blame myself, either. If there is a conflict with my son, or
if he is having problems, I can try to be helpful to him.
That’s what any loving mother would try to do.’’ Then they
continued with this dialogue and modeled ways she could
talk back to her other self-critical thoughts. The two vol-
unteers took turns in the roles of the negative thoughts and
the positive thoughts.

After the role-play was over, I asked the tearful patient
which voice was winning and which voice was losing. Was
it the negative voice or the positive voice? Which voice
was more realistic, more believable? She said that the neg-
ative voice was unrealistic, and that the positive voice was
winning. I pointed out that the volunteers were actually
verbalizing her own self-criticisms.

Although her depression did not improve dramatically by
the end of that group, it seemed that the clouds lifted just

FEELING GOOD 471

a little bit. The next time I saw her in a group, her mood
had brightened up considerably. She was quite personable
and could talk without crying for the first time since ad-
mission. She said she wanted to practice the role-playing
in the group so she could learn how to do it. She said she
was also intent on getting a referral to a cognitive therapist
near her home after discharge so she could continue the
work that was proving to be so helpful to her.

The method that helped this, patient is also called the
“‘double-standard technique.”’ It is based on the idea that
many of us operate on a double standard. We may judge
ourselves in a harsh, critical, demanding way, and yet we
judge others in a more compassionate and reasonable man-
ner. The idea is to give up this double standard and agree
to judge all human beings, including ourselves, by one set
of standards that is based on truth and compassion instead
of using a separate standard that is distorted and mean when
we judge ourselves.

Myth Number 10. ‘‘It is shameful to receive psycho-
therapy because it means I am weak or neurotic. It is more
acceptable to be treated with a drug because it means I have
a medical illness, like diabetes.’’ Actually, the sense of
Shame is common in depressed patients who are treated
with drugs or psychotherapy. Often, the double-standard
technique just described above can be helpful. Imagine, for
example, that you’ve just discovered that a dear friend of
yours received psychotherapy for depression and found that
the treatment was helpful. Ask yourself what you would
say to your friend. Would you say: ‘‘Oh, the psychotherapy
just shows what a weak and defective neurotic you are. You
should have taken a drug instead. What you did was shame-
ful.’’ If you would not say this to a friend, then why give
yourself these messages? That’s the essence of the double-
standard technique.

Myth Number 11. ‘‘My problems are real, so psycho-
therapy couldn’t possibly help me.’’ Actually, cognitive

472 David D. Burns, M.D.

therapy seems to work the best with depressed individuals
with real problems in their lives, including catastrophic
medical problems such as terminal cancer or an amputation,
bankruptcy, or severe personal relationship problems. In
many cases, I have seen individuals with problems like this
who improved in a handful of cognitive therapy sessions.
In contrast, chronically depressed individuals without any
obvious problems that triggered their depressions are often
more difficult to treat. Although the prognosis is excellent,
they may require more intensive and prolonged treatment.

Myth Number 12. ‘‘My problems are hopeless, so no
psychotherapy or drug could possibly help me.’’ This is
your depression talking, and not reality. Hopelessness is a
common but horrible symptom of depression that is based
on twisted thinking, just as the other symptoms are. One
of the distortions is called ‘‘emotional reasoning.’’ The de-
pressed individual may reason: I feel hopeless, therefore I
must be hopeless. Another cognitive distortion that leads to
feelings of hopeless is fortune-telling—you are making a
negative prediction that you will never improve, and as-
suming this prediction is really a fact. Other distortions can
lead to feelings of hopelessness as well. These include the
following:

¢ all-or-nothing thinking—you think of yourself as com-
pletely happy or completely depressed; shades of gray
do not count, so if you are not completely happy or
completely recovered, you assume you are completely
depressed and hopeless;

¢ overgeneralization—you see your current feelings of
depression as a never-ending pattern of defeat and suf-
fering;

¢ mental filter—you selectively think of all the times you
have been depressed, and end up thinking your whole
life will be bad forever;

FEELING GOOD 473

¢ discounting the positive—you insist that the times you
were not depressed don’t count;

“‘should’’ statements—you use up all your energy tell-
ing yourself you ‘‘shouldn’t’’ be depressed (or you
‘‘shouldn’t’’ have gotten depressed again) instead of
systematically working to overcome the feelings;

labeling—you tell yourself you are hopelessly and ir-
reversibly defective and conclude that you could never
really feel whole, or happy, or worthwhile.

Other cognitive distortions, such as magnification or per-
sonalization, can also lead to feelings of hopelessness. AlI-
though these feelings are not realistic, they can act like
self-fulfilling prophecies. If you give up, nothing will
change and you will conclude that you really were hope-
less.

Patients who feel hopeless usually cannot see that they
are deceiving themselves. They are nearly always con-
vinced these feelings are entirely valid. If I can persuade
them to challenge these hopeless feelings and try to get
better—even though they feel in their hearts that this is
impossible—they usually do begin to improve, slowly at
first and then more rapidly, until they feel a whole lot bet-
ter.

One of the most important tasks of any therapist is to
help depressed patients find the courage and determination
to resist and fight these hopeless feelings. This battle is
often fierce and rarely easy, but nearly always rewarding in
the long run.

Chapter 19

W/hat You Need to Know about
Commonly Prescribed

Antidepressants
(Notes and References appear on pages 682-687.)

This chapter contains practical general information about
the use of antidepressants. You will learn who is the most—
and least—likely to benefit from an antidepressant, how
you can tell whether an antidepressant drug is really work-
ing, how much mood elevation you can anticipate, how
long you should stay on it, and what you can do if it doesn’t
work. You will also learn how to monitor and minimize
side effects and prevent potentially dangerous interactions
between antidepressants and other drugs you may take, in-
cluding prescription drugs as well as nonprescription (over-
the-counter) drugs you can obtain at the drug store or
grocery store. In the next chapter, I will provide specific
information about each antidepressant and mood-stabilizing
drug currently in use.

When you read this chapter, keep in mind that the use
of antidepressants is still a blend of art and science. Each
practitioner has a slightly different philosophy, and your
doctor’s approach may differ from mine. I will state my
own biases up front.

First, I am quite demanding in terms of what I expect

474

FEELING GOOD 475

from an antidepressant. I believe that any antidepressant
medication should have a pretty profound and dramatic ef-
fect in order to justify its continued use. In addition, I firmly
believe that every patient taking antidepressants should take
a mood test like the one in Chapter 2 at least once a week.
Your score on this test (or any other good depression test)
is a highly reliable measure of how well your antidepressant
is working. I do not encourage patients to continue taking
drugs that have only modest or questionable beneficial ef-
fects on mood. When the score on the test goes down only
a little bit (for example, a 30 percent or 40 percent im-
provement), I would be inclined to call this a placebo effect
and not a real drug effect. This amount of improvement
could be due to the passage of time, the psychotherapy, or
the belief that the drug will work. If the improvement in
mood is minimal, and assuming the patient has had a suf-
ficient dose of the medication for a sufficient period of time,
I would probably take the patient off the drug and try an-
other medication, a combination of medication and psycho-
therapy, or psychotherapy alone.

Now some readers may think, ““but a 40-percent im-
provement in my mood sounds pretty good. This sounds
like real improvement. I’m almost half better.’’ Certainly,
any improvement is desirable, but research studies indicate
that inactive placebos can also have large antidepressant
effects. A 40-percent improvement has been shown to be a
typical placebo response. The only justification for taking
any antidepressant drug is this: Is the drug doing its job?
To my way of thinking, the goal of treatment is to recover
from depression. Most patients want complete recovery, not
just a slight or moderate improvement in their mood. If an
antidepressant is not accomplishing this goal after a rea-
sonable trial, then I would recommend switching to another
drug or treatment approach.

Second, I never treat patients with medications alone. If
I prescribe an antidepressant for a patient, I always combine
the medication treatment with psychotherapy as well. Al-
though I tried the medication-only approach with large

476 David D. Burns, M.D.

numbers of patients early in my career, I almost never
found this approach to be satisfactory.

For example, when I was a postdoctoral fellow following
my residency training at the University of Pennsylvania, I
ran the lithium clinic at the Philadelphia VA Hospital. I
treated many depressed veterans suffering from bipolar
manic-depressive illness with a combination of lithium and
other antidepressant drugs. Although the medications ap-
peared to be helpful, the results were not very encouraging.
Most of these poor veterans were going in and out of the
hospital almost constantly, and few were leading produc-
tive, joyous, stable lives. Later in my career, when I learned
cognitive therapy, I treated all my manic-depressive pa-
tients with a combination of medications plus psychother-
apy. The results were much better. From that point on, I
can recall only one manic-depressive patient I treated who
required hospitalization for an episode of mania.

The results with depressed patients were similar. Early
in my career, I treated depressed patients with the drugs
alone or drugs combined with traditional supportive psy-
chotherapy. I administered a depression test like the one in
Chapter 2 to every patient every session. I could see very
clearly that while some patients were helped a lot by anti-
depressants, many were not. A lot of patients improved
only slightly, and some did not improve at all. Later in my
career, I began to combine antidepressant drugs with the
new cognitive therapy techniques I was learning, and saw
much better results. Eventually, I gave up treating patients
with drugs alone.

Third, I usually use one medication at a time, rather than
a combination of many different kinds of drugs, although
there are certainly many exceptions to this or any rule. The
idea behind polypharmacy is that if one drug is good, two,
three, or more will be even better. Some doctors also use
additional drugs to try to combat the side effects of other
drugs the patient is taking. The potential drawbacks to poly-

FEELING GOOD 477

pharmacy are many, including more side effects and more
possible adverse drug interactions. I discuss polypharmacy
in detail at the end of Chapter 20 and describe a number
of specific situations in which the use of more than one
drug may be justified.

Finally, I have usually not kept patients on antidepressant
drugs indefinitely following recovery. Instead, I slowly ta-
per patients off their antidepressants after they have been
feeling really good for several months. I have found that in
most cases, patients who have recovered can continue to
remain undepressed without medications. Keep in mind that
all my patients have received cognitive therapy, whether or
not they also received an antidepressant. The cognitive ther-
apy is probably responsible for the good long-term results,
because patients learn tools they can use for the rest of their
lives whenever they are feeling upset.

Many doctors practice very differently. They tell their
patients that they must continue taking their antidepressants
indefinitely to correct a ‘chemical imbalance in the brain’’
and to prevent relapses into depression. While relapse is an
important issue, I have found that training patients to use
their cognitive therapy tools whenever they need them
seems to maintain improvement following recovery. In fact,
a number of well-controlled long-term follow-up studies
have confirmed that this works better than drugs to prevent
relapses.

While this is my philosophy in a nutshell, remember that
there is no single ‘‘correct’’ approach, and your doctor’s
philosophy might differ from mine. In addition, there are
many exceptions to any rule, and your own diagnosis or
personal history may mandate a different approach from the
one I have just outlined. If you have questions about your
treatment, discuss your concerns with your physician. In
my experience, the sense of teamwork and mutual respect
is still the most important ingredient in any successful treat-
ment.

478 David D. Burns, M.D.

If |! Am Depressed, Does It Mean that I Have a
“Chemical Imbalance” in My Brain?

There is an almost superstitious belief in our culture that
depression results from a chemical or hormonal imbalance
of some type in the brain. But this is an unproven theory
and not a fact. As discussed in Chapter 17, we still do not
know the cause of depression and we do not know how or
why antidepressant drugs work. The theory that depression
results from a chemical imbalance has been around for at
least two thousand years, but there is still no proof of this,
so we really do not know for sure. Furthermore, there is no
test or clinical symptom that could demonstrate that a par-
ticular patient or group of patients has a ‘‘chemical imbal-
ance’’ that is causing the depression.

if | Am Depressed, Does It Mean that I Should
Take an Antidepressant?

Many people also believe that if you are depressed you
should be on an antidepressant. However, I do not insist
that every depressed patient must take an antidepressant.
Large numbers of well-controlled studies published in re-
spected scientific journals indicate that the newer forms of
psychotherapy can be just as effective as, and sometimes
more effective than, antidepressants.

Certainly many depressed people have been treated suc-
cessfully with antidepressants and swear by them. They are
valuable tools and I am glad to have them available in my
treatment arsenal. Sometimes antidepressants are helpful,
but they are rarely total answers, and often they are not
necessary.

FEELING GOOD 479

How Can ! Decide Whether or Not to Take
an Antidepressant?

I always ask my patients during their initial evaluations
whether or not they would prefer to take an antidepressant.
If a patient strongly feels that she or he would prefer to be
treated without an antidepressant, I treat with cognitive
therapy alone, and this is usually successful. However, if
the patient has been working hard in therapy for six to ten
weeks without any improvement, I sometimes suggest we
try to add an antidepressant to put some “‘high octane’’ in
the tank, so to speak. In some cases, this makes the psy-
chotherapy more effective.

If a patient feels strongly that she or he would like to
receive an antidepressant at the initial evaluation, I treat
with a combination of an antidepressant medication and
psychotherapy right away. However, I almost never treat
patients with antidepressant medications alone, as noted
previously. In my experience, the drugs-only approach has
not been satisfactory. The combination of medications with
psychotherapy seems to produce better results in the short
term and in the long term than treating patients with drugs
alone.

It may sound unscientific to base the medication decision
on the patient’s preferences, and certainly there are excep-
tional cases where I feel I have to make a recommendation
that differs from my patient’s wishes. But the majority of
time, I have found that patients do well when treated with
the approach they are most comfortable with.

So if you are depressed and you have strong positive
feelings that an antidepressant drug will help you, this in-
creases the likelihood that you will be helped by one of
these medications. And if you feel strongly that you would
prefer to be treated with a drug-free form of therapy, the
likelihood of a successful outcome is also good. But I
would urge flexibility in your thinking. If you are receiving
a medication, I strongly believe that cognitive or interper-
sonal psychotherapy can enhance your recovery. If you are

480 David D. Burns, M.D.

receiving psychotherapy and your progress is slow, an an-
tidepressant might accelerate your recovery.

Can Anyone Take an Antidepressant?

Most people can, but competent medical supervision is
a must. For example, special precautions are indicated if
you have a history of epilepsy, heart, liver, or kidney dis-
ease, high blood pressure, or certain other disorders. For
the very young and elderly, some medications should be
avoided, and smaller dosages may be indicated. And, as
noted above, if you are taking medicines in addition to an
antidepressant, special precautions are sometimes required.
Properly administered, an antidepressant is safe and may
be lifesaving. But don’t try to regulate it or administer it
on your own. Medical supervision is a must.

Should a pregnant woman use an antidepressant? This
sensitive question often requires consultation between the
psychiatrist and the obstetrician. Since fetal abnormalities
might occur, the potential benefit, the severity of the de-
pression, and the stage of pregnancy must all be taken into
account. Other treatment approaches should usually be em-
ployed first, and an active self-help program of the type
described in this book might eliminate the need for a med-
ication. This would give optimal protection to the devel-
oping child, of course. On the other hand, if the depression
is very severe, there may be cases where it makes sense to
use an antidepressant.

W/ho Is Most—and Least—Likely to Benefit
from an Antidepressant Drug?

Your chance of responding to an appropriate drug may
be enhanced:

9.
10.

FEELING GOOD 481

. If you are unable to carry on with your day-to-day

activities because of your depression.

. If your depression is characterized by many organic

symptoms, such as insomnia, agitation, retardation,
a worsening of symptoms in the morning, or an in-
ability to feel cheered up by positive events.

. If your depression is severe.
. If your depression had a reasonably clear-cut begin-

ning.

. If your symptoms are substantially different from the

way you normally feel.

. If you have a family history of depression.
. If you have had a beneficial response to antidepres-

sant drugs in the past.

. If you strongly feel that you would like to take an

antidepressant drug.
If you are strongly motivated to recover.
If you are married.

Your chance of responding to an appropriate drug may
be diminished:

L.
2.

If you are very angry.

If you have a tendency to complain and to blame
others.

. If you have a history of an exaggerated sensitivity

to drug side effects.

. If you have a history of multiple physical complaints

that your doctor has been unable to diagnose, such
as tiredness, stomach ache, headache, or pains in
your chest, stomach, arms, or legs.

. If you have a long history of another psychiatric dis-

order or hallucinations preceding your depression.

482 David D. Burns, M.D.

6. If you feel strongly that you do not want to take an
antidepressant drug.

7. If you are abusing drugs or alcohol and you are un-
willing to go into a recovery program.

8. If you are receiving financial compensation for your
depression, or if you hope to receive financial com-
pensation. For example, if you receive disability
payments for depression, or if you are involved in a
lawsuit and hope to receive financial compensation
because of your depression, then any form of treat-
ment is going to be difficult. This is because if you
recover, you will lose money. This is a conflict of
interest.

9. If you have failed to respond to other antidepressants
you have been given.

10. If for any reason you have mixed feelings about get-
ting better.

These guidelines are of a general nature and are not in-
tended to be comprehensive or precise. Our ability to pre-
dict who will respond best to a medication or to
psychotherapy is still extremely limited. Many people with
all the positive indicators may fail to respond to antide-
pressants, and many people with all the negative indicators
may respond beautifully to the first drug they receive. In
the future, the use of antidepressant drugs will hopefully
become more precise and scientific, just as the use of an-
tibiotics has become.

If you have many of the negative indicators, is this bad?
I don’t think so. Most patients with all the negative indi-
cators can be treated quite successfully, but it may some-
times take a little longer. In addition, as I have emphasized
repeatedly, a combination of medication with good psycho-
therapy along the lines described in this book is sometimes
more effective than treatment with antidepressant drugs
alone.

FEELING GOOD 483

How Fast and How Well Do Antidepressant
Drugs Work?

Most studies indicate that approximately 60 percent to
70 percent of depressed patients will respond to an anti-
depressant medication. Since approximately 30 percent to
50 percent of depressed patients will also respond to a sugar
pill (a placebo), these studies indicate that an antidepressant
will increase your chances for recovery.

However, remember that the word ‘“‘respond’’ is different
from the word ‘‘recover,’’ and the improvement from an
antidepressant is often only partial. In other words, your
score on a mood test like the one in Chapter 2 may improve
without going into the range considered truly happy (less
than 5). This is why I nearly always combine antidepressant
medication treatment with cognitive and behavioral tech-
niques like those described in this book. Most people are
not interested in just partial improvement. They want the
real McCoy. They want to get up in the morning and say,
“‘Hey, it’s great to be alive!’’

As I have emphasized, most of the depressed and anxious
people I have treated have problems in their lives such as
a marital conflict or a career difficulty, and nearly all of
them beat up on themselves with negative thinking patterns.
In my experience, medication therapy is usually more ef-
fective—and more satisfying—when it is combined with
psychotherapy. Many doctors do prescribe medications
alone without psychotherapy, but I have not found this ap-
proach to be satisfactory.

Which Antidepressants Are the Most
Effective?

All of the currently prescribed antidepressant drugs tend
to work about equally well, and equally rapidly, for most
patients. So far, no new type of antidepressant medication
has been shown to be more effective or faster-acting than

484 David D. Burns, M.D.

the older drugs that have been available for several decades.
However, there are dramatic differences in the costs of the
different types of antidepressants and in the side effects
they have. Essentially, the newer medications are much
more expensive because they are still on patent. However,
they are far more popular because they usually have fewer
side effects than the older, cheaper drugs. If you have cer-
tain kinds of medical conditions, some antidepressants will
be relatively safer for you than others. I will discuss these
issues in greater detail in Chapter 20.

Sometimes a patient will respond particularly well to one
antidepressant or kind of antidepressant. Unfortunately, we
cannot usually predict this ahead of time for the individual,
and so most physicians use a trial-and-error approach.
There are, however, a few generalizations about the kinds
of antidepressants that work best for certain kinds of prob-
lems. For example, drugs that have stronger effects on the
serotonin systems in the brain are generally considered to
be effective for patients who suffer from obsessive-
compulsive disorder (called OCD for short). These patients
have recurrent illogical thoughts (like a fear that the stove
will catch fire and burn the house down) and perform com-
pulsive rituals over and over (such as checking repeatedly
to make sure that the stove is turned off). Drugs often pre-
scribed for OCD include several of the tricyclic antide-
pressants, including clomipramine (Anafranil), one of the
SSRIs, such as fluoxetine (Prozac) or fluvoxamine (Luvox),
or one of the MAOIs, such as tranylcypromine (Parnate).

If a depressed patient also has symptoms of anxiety, such
as panic attacks or social anxiety, the physician might also
choose one of the SSRI or MAOI antidepressants, since
these often seem to be quite effective. Or the physician
might choose one of the more sedative antidepressants,
such as trazodone (Desyrel) or doxepin (Sinequan), think-
ing that the relaxation might help reduce the anxiety.

In my practice, I have treated many patients with a par-
ticularly difficult type of chronic and severe depression
known as borderline personality disorder (called BPD for

FEELING GOOD 485

short). Patients with this disorder have intense and con-
stantly fluctuating negative moods such as depression, anx-
iety, and anger. Patients with BPD also experience lots of
turbulence in their personal relationships. In my experience,
quite a few BPD patients have responded dramatically to
the MAOI antidepressants, and so I might be more inclined
to choose an MAOI for patients with these features. Of
course, some patients with BPD have poor impulse control,
and they may do better with one of the newer and safer
antidepressants. This is because the MAOIs can be quite
dangerous if patients mix these drugs with certain forbidden
foods and medications that I will describe in detail in Chap-
ter 20.

There are a number of other guidelines as well, but they
should not be taken too literally because there are so many
exceptions to them. The bottom line is this: any depressed
patient has a reasonably good chance of having a positive
response to almost any antidepressant medication if it is
prescribed at the correct dose for a reasonable period of
time. You can ask your physician if she or he has a reason
for recommending a particular antidepressant. However,
most physicians will prescribe antidepressants they are fa-
miliar with. This is good practice. Few doctors can master
the myriad details about all the currently prescribed anti-
depressants, and so most doctors try to become familiar
with the one or two agents they use most frequently. In this
way, they will have the greatest expertise about the medi-
cation they are recommending for you.

How Can I Tell if My Antidepressant Is Really
Working?

My own philosophy is to use a depression test like the
one in Chapter 2 as a guide. Take the test once or twice a
week during treatment. This is really important. The test
will show whether and to what extent you have improved.
If you are not getting better, or if you are getting worse,

486 David D. Burns, M.D.

your scores will not improve. If your scores are steadily
improving, this indicates the drug is probably helping.

Unfortunately, most doctors do not require their patients
to complete a mood test like the one in Chapter 2 between
therapy sessions. Instead, they rely on their own clinical
judgment to evaluate the effectiveness of the treatment.
This is quite unfortunate, because studies have indicated
that doctors are often poor judges of how patients feel in-
side.

How Much Mood Elevation Can | Anticipate?

Your aim should be to reduce the score on the depression
test in Chapter 2 until it is in the range considered normal
and happy. This is true whether you are being treated with
an antidepressant, with psychotherapy, or with a combina-
tion of the two. Treatment cannot be considered completely
successful if your score remains in the depressed range.

If One Antidepressant Works Somewhat,
Will It Be Even Better to Take Two or More
Antidepressants at the Same Time?

As a general rule, it is usually not necessary (or even
beneficial) to take two or more different antidepressant
drugs simultaneously. The two drugs may interact in ways
that are unpredictable, and the side effects may increase
substantially. There are exceptions to this, of course. For
example, if you are restless and having trouble sleeping,
your doctor may sometimes add a small dose of a second,
more sedating antidepressant at night to help you get a good
night’s sleep. Or your doctor may add a small dose of a
second antidepressant to try to increase the effectiveness of
the first antidepressant. This is called an ‘‘augmentation’’
strategy, and I will discuss this approach in greater detail

FEELING GOOD 487

in Chapter 20. But on the average, one drug at a time usu-
ally works best.

How Long Will It Take Before | Can Expect to
Feel Better?

It typically requires a minimum of two or three weeks
before an antidepressant medicine begins to improve your
mood. Some drugs may take even longer. For example,
Prozac may not become effective for five to eight weeks.
It is not known why antidepressants have this delayed re-
action (and whoever discovers the reason will probably be
a good candidate for a Nobel prize). Many patients have
the impulse to discontinue their antidepressants before three
weeks have passed because they feel hopeless and believe
the medicine is not working. This is illogical, since it is
unusual for these agents to become effective right away.

What Can I Do tf My Antidepressant
Doesn't Work?

I have seen many patients who failed to respond ade-
quately to one or many antidepressants. In fact, at my clinic
in Philadelphia, most of the patients were referred to me
after unsuccessful treatments with a variety of antidepres-
sant drugs and therapy as well. Most of the time we were
eventually able to get an excellent antidepressant effect,
often through a combination of cognitive therapy and an-
other medication that the patient had not yet tried. The im-
portant thing is to keep persisting in your efforts until you
recover. Sometimes this requires enormous dedication and
faith. Patients often feel like giving up, but persistence
nearly always pays off.

I have stated earlier that the feelings of hopelessness are
probably the worst aspect of depression. These feelings
sometimes lead to suicide attempts because patients feel so

488 David D. Burns, M.D.

convinced that things will never get any better. They think
that things have always been this way and that their feelings
of worthlessness and despair will go on forever. In addition,
there is a kind of genius about depression. Patients can be
so incredibly persuasive about their hopelessness that even
their doctors and families may start believing them after a
while. Early in my career I grappled with this and often
felt tempted to give up on particularly difficult patients. But
a trusted colleague urged me never to give in to the belief
that any patient was hopeless. Throughout my career, this
policy has paid off. No matter what type of treatment you
receive, faith and persistence can be the Keys to success. I
cannot emphasize this enough.

How Long Should I Take an Antidepressant if
It Doesn't Seem to Be Working?

Of course, you should always check with your physician
before making any changes in your medication, but on av-
erage, a trial of four or five weeks should be adequate. If
you do not have a clear-cut and fairly dramatic improve-
ment in your mood, then a switch to another drug is prob-
ably indicated. It is important, however, that the dose be
adjusted correctly during this time, since doses that are too
high or too low may not be effective. Sometimes your doc-
tor may order a blood test to make sure the dose you are
taking is adequate for you.

One of the commonest errors your doctor may make is
to keep you on a particular antidepressant for many months
(or even years) when there is no clear-cut evidence that you
have improved. This makes absolutely no sense to me!
However, I have seen many severely depressed individuals
who reported that they had been treated continuously with
the same antidepressant for many years but were not aware
of any beneficial effects from the medication. Their scores
on the mood test in Chapter 2 usually indicated they were

FEELING GOOD 489

still severely depressed. When I asked them why they were
taking the drug for such a long time, they usually said that
theirs doctors told them that they needed it, or that it was
necessary because of their ‘“‘chemical imbalance.’’ If your
mood has not improved, it seems clear that the drug has
not worked, so why keep taking it? If a drug does not have
fairly substantial beneficial effects, as indicated by a clear
and continuing improvement in your score on a depression
test like the one in Chapter 2, then it is usually appropriate
to switch to another antidepressant medication.

How Long Should | Continue to Take the
Antidepressant if It Does Help Me?

You and your doctor will have to make this decision
together. If this is your first episode of depression, you can
probably go off the medicine after six to twelve months
and continue to feel undepressed. In some cases, I have
discontinued antidepressants after only three months with
good results, and rarely found that treatment for more than
six months was necessary. But different doctors have dif-
ferent opinions about this.

One of the strongest predictors of relapse in research
studies is the degree of improvement at the end of treat-
ment. In other words, if you are happy and completely free
of depression, and this is documented by a score below 5
on the depression test in Chapter 2, the likelihood of a
prolonged depression-free period is high. On the other
hand, if you are partially improved but your depression
score is still somewhat elevated, the likelihood is much
greater that the depression will worsen or return in the fu-
ture, whether or not you continue to take an antidepressant
medication.

This is another reason why I like to combine antidepres-
sant medications with cognitive behavioral therapy. The pa-
tients usually have a much better response, and very few

490 David D. Burns, M.D.

patients in my private practice appeared to relapse and re-
turn for additional treatment following recovery.

What if My Doctor Tells Me I Have to Stay on
the Antidepressant Indefinitely?

Patients with certain kinds of depressions will almost def-
initely need to take medications on a long-term basis. For
example, if a patient has bipolar (manic-depressive) illness
with uncontrollable highs as well as lows, long-term treat-
ment with a mood-stabilizing medication such as lithium,
valproic acid, or carbamazepine may be necessary.

If you have had many years of unremitting depression or
if you have been prone to many recurrent attacks of de-
pression, you might want to consider maintenance therapy
for a longer period of time. Since doctors are becoming
more aware of the relapsing nature of mood disorders, the
use of antidepressants on a long-term or prophylactic basis
is gaining greater favor.

Some doctors routinely recommend therapy with anti-
depressants indefinitely, in much the same way they might
insist that patients with diabetes must take daily insulin to
regulate their blood sugar. Several research studies suggest
that such maintenance therapy can reduce the incidence of
depressive relapses. However, research studies also indicate
that treatment with the cognitive therapy techniques de-
scribed in this book can also reduce depressive relapses. In
addition, these studies suggest that the preventive effect of
cognitive therapy may be greater than the preventive effect
of antidepressant medications. One important advantage of
cognitive behavioral therapy is that you learn new skills
to minimize or prevent future depressions. For example,
the simple exercise of writing down and challenging your
own negative thoughts when you are under stress can be
invaluable.

In my private practice, the vast majority of the depressed
patients I have treated have not had to stay on antidepres-

FEELING GOOD 491

sant drugs indefinitely following recovery. Most of them
did extremely well with no medications simply by using
the cognitive therapy skills they learned whenever they be-
came upset again in the future. This is very encouraging,
and it shows there is quite a bit you can do not only to
treat your own depression, but also to minimize the prob-
ability of severe and prolonged depressions in the future. It
also suggests that if you are taking an antidepressant, it
might be very helpful for you to study and practice the
methods in this book.

Once you discover how to change your own negative
thinking patterns using the techniques I describe, you may
find that you will be able to remain undepressed without
any medications. But certainly, you will want to discuss
this with your physician. It is never smart to go off a med-
icine or to change the dose of a medication unless you talk
this over with your doctor first.

What if I Start Getting More Depressed When
| Taper Off the Medication?

This is actually pretty common, and I will tell you how
I have handled it in my own practice. First, | make sure
the patient continues to take the depression test in Chapter
2 at least once or twice a week while she or he is tapering
off the medication. Then we develop a plan for slowly re-
ducing the dose of the antidepressant. I tell patients that if
they start to feel depressed again while tapering off the
drug, and this is reflected by an increased score on the
depression test, then they should temporarily raise the dose
slightly for a week or two. This usually leads to an im-
provement in mood again. Then they can slowly continue
to taper off the drug again. This approach is reassuring
because it puts the patient in control. After a couple tries
like this, most patients have been able to taper off their
antidepressants without becoming depressed again.

492 David D. Burns, M.D.

\W/hat Should | Do if the Depression Comes
Back in the Future?

If your depression returns, the chances are excellent that
you will again respond to the same drug that helped you
the first time. It may be the proper biological ‘‘key’’ for
you. So you can probably use that drug again for any future
episode of depression. If any blood relative of yours de-
velops a depression, this drug might also be a good choice
for them because a person’s response to antidepressants,
like the depression itself, appears to be influenced by ge-
netic factors.

The same reasoning applies to the psychotherapy tech-
niques. I have found that for most people, the same kinds
of events (for example, being criticized by an authority fig-
ure) tend to trigger depression, and the same kinds of cog-
nitive therapy technique usually reverse the depression for
a particular patient. In most cases patients have been able
to reverse a new episode of depression fairly rapidly with-
out having to take the medication again. I encourage my
patients to come in for a little ‘‘tune-up’’ if they become
depressed again in the future. Often these “‘tune-ups’’ con-
sisted of only one or two therapy sessions, since we were
usually able to reapply the same technique that had helped
them so much the first time I treated them.

W/hat Are the Most Common Side Effects of
the Antidepressants?

As discussed in Chapter 17, all the medications pre-
scribed for depression, anxiety, and other psychiatric prob-
lems can cause different kinds of side effects. For example,
many of the older antidepressants (such as amitriptyline,
trade name Elavil) cause fairly noticeable side effects such
as dry mouth, sleepiness, dizziness, and weight gain, among
others. Many of the newer antidepressants (such as fluox-
etine, trade name Prozac) can cause nervousness, sweating,

FEELING GOOD 493

upset stomach, or a loss of interest in sex as well as diffi-
culties having an orgasm.

I will describe the specific side effects of every antide-
pressant in Chapter 20. You will see that some medications
produce lots of side effects whereas others produce very
few.

The Side Effects Checklist on pages 494-496 can pro-
vide you and your physician with extremely accurate in-
formation about any side effects that you experience while
you are taking a medication. If you take this test a couple
times per week, this will show how the side effects change
over time.

Remember, however, that many of these so-called side
effects can occur even if you are not taking any medication,
since many side effects are also symptoms of depression.
Feeling tired, having trouble sleeping at night, or a loss of
interest in sex would be good examples. So it can be very
useful to complete the Side Effects Checklist at least once
or twice before you start any medication. That way, you
can see if a side effect began before or after you started the
drug. Obviously, if you had the same side effect before you
started taking a drug, then the drug is probably not to blame
for it.

It is also good to remember that patients who only take
placebo medications (sugar pills) during research studies
tend to report lots of side effects. This is because they think
they ate taking a real drug. So there is no proof that a
particular side effect is necessarily caused by the drug you
are taking. When in doubt, talk this over with your physi-
cian.

Let me give you a particularly vivid example of how the
mind can occasionally play tricks on us. I once treated a
high school teacher for depression. She was not responding
well to the psychotherapy and I had the hunch that she
would respond to a particular antidepressant drug called
tranylcypromine (Parnate) that is described in Chapter 20.
However, she was somewhat stubborn and had a strong fear
of taking any medication. She complained that she would

494 David D. Burns, M.D.
Side Effects Checklist*

Instructions: Put a check (%) after each
item to indicate if you have had this type
of side effect during the past several
days. Please answer all the items.

Mouth and Stomach

=
d
Led
©
dee
7)
oD
eo)
T
N

O—Not At All
3—A Lot
4—Extremely

. dry mouth

. frequently thirsty

. loss of appetite

. nausea or vomiting

. stomach cramps or upset stomach

. weight gain or loss

. constipation

Oy, OOP~T, A] MEHR] WN] —

. diarrhea
Eyes and Ears
10. blurred vision

. increase in appetite or eating too much ||

11. overly sensitive to light

12. changes in vision, such as halos around
objects

13. ringing in your ears | of ff
Skin

14. sweating too much Pf fT

15. rash Pf ff

16. excessive sunburn when exposed to sun Ff fot

17. change in skin color Pt fT |

18. bleeding or bruising easily Pf ff |
Sex

. loss of interest in sex

. difficulties getting sexually excited

. difficulties getting an erection (men)

22.
23.

24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.

36.

3

~]

NO] =

43.
44.
45.

FEELING GOOD 495

Side Effects Checklist
continued

difficulties having an orgasm

difficulties with your period (women)

= = >
<< a= ®
Cy]
~ © =
<< 213/29
io) oj~ i
iad
Jill di gid

Stimulation and Nervousness

stimulated
agitated
anxious, worried or nervous
feeling strange or “‘spaced out’’
excess energy
Sleep Problems
feeling tired or exhausted
loss of energy
sleeping too much
trouble falling asleep
sleep that is restless or disturbed
waking up too early in the morning

nightmares or strange dreams

Muscles and Coordination

muscle jerks or twitches

. slurred speech
38.
39.
AO.
Al.
42.

tremor

difficulty walking or loss of balance
feeling slowed down

stiffness of the arms, legs, or tongue

feeling restless, like you have to keep
moving your arms or legs

hand-wringing
constant, regular, rhythmic leg jiggling

abnormal movements of your face, lips,
tongue

496 David D. Burns, M.D.

Side Effects Checklist
continued

Instructions: Put a check (W) after each
item to indicate if you have had this type
of side effect during the past several
days. Please answer all the items.

46. abnormal movements of other parts of
your body, such as your fingers or
shoulders

| 2—Moderately
: 4—Extremely

|
|
{

47. muscle spasms of your tongue, jaw, or
neck

Other
48. difficulty remembering things

49. feeling dizzy, light-headed, or faint

pt |
pt fe
50. feeling your heart race or pound Pot]
51. swelling in your arms or legs Pf
52. trouble starting urination Pf ft |
53. headache Ff ft

St

ptt

54. breast swelling or enlargement

55. milk secretion from the nipples

Please describe any other side effects:

*Copyright © 1998 by David D. Burns, M.D.

not be able to tolerate the side effects. I explained that I
planned to prescribe a low dose and that in my experience
most patients did not have many side effects with this med-
ication, especially when the dose was low. But my efforts
were to no avail—she insisted the side effects of the drug
would be unbearable, and refused to accept a prescription.

FEELING GOOD 497

I asked if she would be willing to do a little experiment
to check this out. I told her I would give her two weeks’
worth of pills in fourteen separate envelopes. Each enve-
lope was labeled with the date and day of the week she
was to take the pills inside it. I explained that some enve-
lopes would contain placebo pills that could not have any
side effects whatsoever. Half the pills would be yellow and
half would be red, but she would not know whether she
was taking the real medication or a placebo on any given
day. The envelope for the first day contained one yellow
pill and the envelope for the second day contained one red
pill. The envelopes for the third and fourth days contained
two yellow pills each, and the envelopes for the fifth and
sixth days contained two red pills each. Finally, each en-
velope for the second week contained three yellow pills or
three red pills.

I asked her to complete the Side Effects Checklist every
day and to record the date. I explained how this experiment
would help us determine whether any side effects she ex-
perienced on a given day were due to the real drug or the
placebo effect. She reluctantly agreed, but insisted that her
body was very sensitive to drugs and predicted the exper-
iment would prove just how wrong I was.

Shortly after she started taking the pills she started calling
me almost daily with alarming reports about severe side ef-
fects, especially on the days she was taking the yellow pills.
She said these effects also spilled over to the’days she took
the red pills as well. I explained the side effects usually d1-
minished over time and encouraged her to try to continue.

On Sunday evening she had the answering service page
me at home for an emergency. She stated that the side ef-
fects did not diminish but were getting worse. In fact, they
were so severe that she simply could no longer function.
She was dizzy and confused and fatigued. Her mouth was
as dry as cotton. She staggered when she tried to walk and
could barely get out of bed. She had severe headaches. She
said she would not take any more pills and wanted to know
why I[ had put her through such grief.

I apologized, told her to stop the medications immedi-

498 David D. Burns, M.D.

ately and made an appointment to see her the first thing
Monday morning for an emergency session. I reassured her
that none of her symptoms sounded life-threatening, al-
though she was obviously in great distress. I told her to
bring her daily Side Effects Checklists to the session and
promised that we would break the code together the next
morning so we could find out which days she had taken
the placebos and which days she had taken the real pills.

The next morning I explained that all the pills she had
taken were placebos I had obtained from the hospital phar-
macist. They were simply red placebos and yellow place-
bos—there were no Parnate pills in any of the envelopes.

This information surprised her, and tears began rolling
down her cheeks. She acknowledged that she never would
have believed that her mind could have such powerful ef-
fects on her body. She had been totally convinced the side
effects were real. She then went ahead to take the Parnate
in small doses and her mood improved substantially over
the next month or two. She also started working very hard
on her psychotherapy homework between sessions. She
continued to fill out the Depression Test and the Side Ef-
fects Checklist once a week, but she did not report many
side effects.

I do not mean to imply that all side effects are in your
mind. On rare occasions this can occur, but most of the
time the side effects are quite real, and the vast majority of
my patients have reported them accurately. If you use the
Side Effects Checklist on a daily basis, it will help you and
your doctor assess the specific type and severity of any
symptoms you might experience. Then the appropriate
medication adjustments can be made if the side effects are
excessive or dangerous.

Why Do Antidepressant Drugs Have
Side Effects?

You learned in Chapter 17 that antidepressant drugs can
stimulate or block the receptors for the neurotransmitter

FEELING GOOD 499

chemicals that nerves use to send messages to each other.
In that chapter, we focused on serotonin, since this trans-
mitter is felt to be involved in the regulation of mood. One
of the most important and helpful discoveries of the past
two decades is that antidepressants can also interact with
the receptors for several additional chemical transmitters in
the brain. These interactions appear to be responsible for
many of the side effects of the antidepressants.

The three brain receptors that have been studied the most
intensively are called histamine receptors, alpha-adrenergic
receptors, and muscarinic receptors. These are located on
nerves that use histamine, norepinephrine, and acetylcho-
line, respectively, as their chemical transmitters. Drugs that
block histamine receptors are called ‘‘antihistamines,’’ a
term you are probably familiar with. Drugs that block
alpha-adrenergic receptors are called ‘‘alpha-blockers,”’
and drugs that block muscarinic receptors are called ‘‘an-
ticholinergics.’’

Each type of receptor is responsible for certain kinds of
side effects. You can predict the side effects of any drug if
you understand how strongly the drug affects each of these
three brain systems. Antidepressant medications produce
many of their side effects because they block histaminic
receptors, alpha-adrenergic receptors, and cholinergic re-
ceptors (which are also called “‘muscarinic’’ receptors) that
are located on the surfaces of nerves inside of your brain
and throughout your body as well. In case you do not recall
what a “‘receptor’’ is, it is simply an area on the surface of
a nerve that can turn the nerve on or off. The histamine
receptors are located on nerves that use histamine as a
chemical transmitter, the alpha-adrenergic receptors are lo-
cated on nerves that use norepinephrine as a chemical trans-
mitter; and the cholinergic receptors are located on nerves
that use acetylcholine as a chemical transmitter. If you
block any of these three types of receptors, you will turn
the nerves off. The effects of different antidepressant med-
ications on these three receptors help explain many of the
side effects of these drugs.

For example, amitriptyline (Elavil) is an older antide-

500 David D. Burns, M.D.

pressant that can cause many side effects, including sleep-
iness, weight gain, dizziness, dry mouth, blurred vision, and
forgetfulness, to name just a few of the more common ones.
Most of these side effects are not dangerous, but they can
be uncomfortable. Let’s see if we can understand these side
effects a little better by examining the effects of amitrip-
tyline on the three kinds of nerve receptors.

Scientists have learned that amitriptyline blocks the cho-
linergic, histamine, and alpha-adrenergic receptors in the
brain. Let’s examine its anti-cholinergic effects first. What
do these cholinergic nerves ordinarily do? Among other
things, they control the amount of lubrication in your mouth.
If you stimulate cholinergic nerves, more fluids will flow
into your mouth from glands that are located in your cheeks.

What would happen if you turned off these nerves that
normally lubricate your mouth? Your mouth would feel
dry. You may have experienced a dry mouth when you
were very nervous (cottonmouth) or when you were exer-
cising for a long time in the sunshine without drinking any
water. Cholinergic nerves also slow the heart, and so anti-
cholinergic drugs like amitriptyline will cause the heart to
speed up. Anticholinergic drugs can also cause forgetful-
ness, confusion, blurred vision, constipation, and difficul-
ties getting your urine Started.

Amitriptyline also blocks alpha-adrenergic receptors on
nerves that use norepinephrine as a transmitter substance.
If you stimulate these alpha-adrenergic receptors, your
blood pressure will usually increase. Conversely, when you
block them, your blood pressure will usually fall. This is
why amitriptyline can cause a drop in blood pressure in
certain individuals. This problem is especially noticeable
when you suddenly stand up, because the drop in blood
pressure makes you dizzy. Dizziness when standing is a
common side effect of amitriptyline and many other anti-
depressants.

As noted above, amitriptyline also blocks histamine re-
ceptors in the brain. Drugs that block these receptors are
called ‘‘antihistamines.’’ You’ve probably taken an anti-
histamine if you’ve had an allergy or a stuffy nose. Drugs

FEELING GOOD 501

that block histamine receptors can make you sleepy and
hungry. This is why amitriptyline, as well as many other
antidepressant drugs that block histamine receptors, causes
tiredness and weight gain.

Many of the older antidepressant medications are cate-
gorized as ‘‘tricyclic’’ antidepressants. The tricyclics have
relatively strong effects on these three kinds of brain re-
ceptors, and so they tend to cause quite a few side effects.
In fact, on pages 530-532 in Chapter 20 you will find a
table that lists each tricyclic and shows how strong its ef-
fects are on each of these three types of brain receptors.
This information indicates how strong the different kinds
of side effects will be for each medication.

In contrast, many of the newer antidepressants (such as
Prozac and the other SSRIs) generally have only weak ef-
fects on the histaminic, alpha-adrenergic, and cholinergic
receptors in the brain. Consequently, they usually produce
fewer side effects than the older drugs like amitriptyline.
For example, the SSRIs are less likely to cause sleepiness,
excessive appetite, dizziness, dry mouth, constipation, and
so forth. The SSRIs also have little effect on the rate or
rhythm of the heart.

However, we are now discovering that the SSRIs such
as Prozac have new and different side effects of their own.
For example, as many as 30 percent to 40 percent of the
patients taking these drugs experience sexual difficulties
such as a loss of interest in sex or difficulties having an
orgasm. They can also cause upset stomach, loss of appe-
tite, weight gain, nervousness, difficulties sleeping, fatigue,
tremor, and excessive sweating, and a number of other side
effects.

VW/hat Can I Do to Prevent or Minimize these
Side Effects?

The likelihood and severity of any side effect usually
depends on the dose of the medication you are taking. As
a general rule, if you start out with a small dose and in-

502 David D. Burns, M.D.

crease the dose gradually, the side effects can be mini-
mized. In addition, many side effects tend to diminish over
time. Sometimes a reduction in dose will minimize side
effects without reducing the effectiveness of an antidepres-
sant; sometimes a change to another type of antidepressant
medication will be needed. If you and your doctor work
together, you can usually find a medication that will have
a beneficial effect on your mood without excessive side
effects.

Your doctor might also add a second medication to help
combat the side effects of an antidepressant medication or
a mood stabilizer. Sometimes this is necessary and justified
and sometimes it is not necessary. I will discuss this issue
in greater detail in Chapter 20 but I will give you a couple
of specific examples here.

Let’s assume that you are taking lithium for manic-
depressive illness. A common side effect of lithium is a
tremor of the hands. You may find it difficult to write your
name clearly or your hand may shake while you are at-
tempting to hold a cup of coffee. One of my patients trem-
bled so much that the coffee would actually spill out of the
cup. Obviously such a severe side effect is not acceptable.

Your doctor may add one of the drugs called beta-
blockers to help combat the tremor. The drug propranolol
(Inderal) is often used for this purpose. However, beta-
blockers have potent effects on the heart and they can also
have a number of side effects of their own. Furthermore,
both lithium and beta-blockers have the potential for ad-
verse interactions with other drugs your psychiatrist or fam-
ily physician may prescribe, and so the situation rapidly
becomes quite complex. In my mind, the question becomes:
Is this tremor so severe and disabling that it justifies adding
a potent cardiac drug? Is there another way to deal with
this side effect without adding more drugs? Would a re-
duction in dose be indicated? Sometimes the beta-blocker
may be justified; sometimes it may not be necessary.

The same kind of reasoning applies to antidepressants.
Sometimes a second drug is necessary to combat a side
effect, but often it is not the best choice. Let’s assume that

FEELING GOOD 503

you are being treated with fluoxetine (Prozac) for depres-
sion. Three common side effects of Prozac include insom-
nia, anxiety, and sexual problems. Let’s examine how your
doctor might handle each of these.

¢ If you are overly stimulated from Prozac and you are
having trouble sleeping, your doctor may add a small
dose of a second, more sedative antidepressant at night.
For example, 50 to 100 mg of trazodone (Desyrel) is
often used. This is a pretty good approach, because the
trazodone differs from most sleeping pills in that it is
not addictive. However, you may also be able to com-
bat the excessive stimulation by taking a smaller dose
of Prozac and by taking it earlier in the day. Then you
might not need to add a second drug. Keep in mind,
too, that the excessive stimulation from Prozac tends
to occur when you first start taking it and may also
disappear after a week or two.

e Prozac can cause anxiety or agitation, especially when
you first start taking it. Your doctor may want to add
a benzodiazepine (minor tranquilizer) such as clona-
zepan (Klonopin) or alprazolam (Xanax) to combat the
nervousness. But the benzodiazepines can be addictive
when taken daily for more than three weeks, and anx-
iety can usually be managed without adding one of
these agents. A reduction in the dose of the Prozac will
often help. The effectiveness of the SSRI antidepres-
sants such as Prozac does not seem to depend on the
dose, so there is little justification for taking a dose that
creates excessive discomfort. The passage of time will
often help as well, since the anxiety from Prozac seems
to diminish or disappear after the first few weeks.

Some patients develop a second wave of nervous-
ness and restlessness after they have been on Prozac
for a number of weeks or months. Sometimes this pat-
tern of agitation is called ‘‘akathisia’’—a syndrome in
which your arms and legs become so extremely restless
that you simply cannot sit still. This intensely uncom-

504 David D. Burns, M.D.

fortable side effect is quite common with the neurolep-
tic drugs used to treat schizophrenia but occurs much
less often with most antidepressants. Prozac leaves
your blood very slowly, however, so the levels increase
more and more during the first five weeks that you are
taking it. Even though a particular dose of Prozac, such
as 20 mg or 40 mg per day, may have been fine at
first, after a month or so that same dose may become
much too high for you. A dramatic reduction in dose
might greatly reduce the side effects without reducing
the antidepressant effects at all. However, many pa-
tients with akathisia have to be taken off the Prozac
and switched to another medication because the akath-
isia has become so severe and uncomfortable. Your
doctor may add another drug temporarily to combat
akathisia, but it seems prudent to reduce the dose of
Prozac or to go off the drug entirely if akathisia de-
velops.

¢ As noted above, as many as 40 percent of men and
women on Prozac (as well as the other SSRI antide-
pressants) develop sexual problems, including a loss of
interest in sex as well as difficulties having an orgasm.
Your doctor might want to add one of several drugs
(bupropion, buspirone, yohimbine, or amantadine) cur-
rently being used to try to combat these sexual side
effects. Once again, the potential benefit should be
weighed against the hazards of these agents, and alter-
native strategies can be considered. I have rarely, if
ever, kept a patient on an SSRI indefinitely, so most
patients have elected just to put up with this side effect,
knowing it would not be a long-term problem. If the
SSRI is causing a dramatic improvement in mood and
there are no other side effects, the loss of interest in
sex for several months may be an acceptable trade-off.
But of course these are subjective issues, and you will
have to make your own decision about this after dis-
cussing your options with your physician.

FEELING GOOD 505

In the next chapter, you will see that I recommend
against combination drug therapies for most patients taking
antidepressants. If you take more than one drug at a time,
you increase the chances for dangerous drug interactions.
In addition, the second medication may create new and dif-
ferent side effects. In most cases, if you and your doctor
work together and use a little common sense, it will not be
necessary to treat antidepressant drug side effects by adding
additional drugs.

How Can I Prevent Potentially Dangerous
Interactions between Antidepressants and
Other Drugs, Including Nonprescription
Drugs?

In recent years doctors have become increasingly aware
that certain types of drugs may interact with each other in
ways that can be dangerous. Two drugs may be quite safe
and have few or no side effects if you take either one sep-
arately; but if you take the two drugs at the same time,
there could be serious consequences because of how the
two drugs interact with each other.

This problem of drug interactions has become increas-
ingly important in recent years for two reasons. First, there
is an increasing trend among psychiatrists to prescribe more
than one psychiatric drug at a time to many of their patients.
This is not an approach with which I am entirely comfort-
able, but it is nevertheless very common. Each new drug
raises the possibility of drug interactions, since different
psychiatric drugs can interact with each other in potentially
dangerous ways. And, as noted in the last chapter, more
and more patients are being put on antidepressant drugs (as
well as other types of psychiatric drugs) for prolonged per-
iods of time, sometimes indefinitely. This is also not an
approach with which I am comfortable, and I have found
that long-term drug treatment for depression is not neces-
sary for most patients. But many psychiatrists do pre-

506 David D. Burns, M.D.

scribe drugs for prolonged times—the practice is in vogue.
And if you do take a psychiatric drug for a long time, even-
tually you will probably receive one or more prescriptions
from other doctors for other medical problems. For exam-
ple, your doctor might prescribe a medication for an al-
lergy, high blood pressure, pain, or an infection. In
addition, you might take an over-the-counter medication for
a cold, a cough, a headache, or an upset stomach. Now the
possibility of drug interactions has to be considered, be-
cause these drugs may interact with the psychiatric drug
you have been taking.

Of course, it goes without saying that psychiatric drugs
can also interact with tobacco and alcohol as well as street
drugs such as cocaine or amphetamines. In some cases
these interactions can also be quite dangerous and even fa-
tal. Some antidepressants interact in extremely dangerous
ways with commonly used drugs, including over-the-
counter medications. I am not trying to be overly alarmist
here. With a little education and good teamwork with your
physician, you can take an antidepressant safely.

In this section I will explain why and how drug inter-
actions happen. In addition, in Chapter 20, I will describe
a number of important drug interactions for each drug or
category of drug you might be taking. Remember that
knowledge about these drug interactions is rapidly evolv-
ing. New information comes out almost on a daily basis.
Make certain each doctor you see has a complete and ac-
curate list of every drug you are taking, including any over-
the-counter (nonprescription) drugs you take. Ask your
doctor if there are any drug interactions that could be im-
portant. Ask your pharmacist the same thing. If they are
not sure, ask them to check it out for you. It is virtually
impossible to keep all potential drug interactions in your
mind, because so much new information is constantly
emerging. References and computer programs that list dan-
gerous drug interactions are readily available to help with
this task. If you are appropriately assertive and have a little
education about the topic, you will be in a better position

FEELING GOOD 507

to have an intelligent discussion with your doctor about
interactions among the drugs you are taking.

You will see in Chapter 20 that I have prepared detailed
charts listing drug interactions for specific antidepressants
or mood stabilizers you may be taking. So, for example, if
you are taking Prozac, you can review the table that lists
its drug interactions. This should take only a minute or two.

You may think that you shouldn’t have to study these
charts, because your doctor should know all about any dan-
gerous drug interactions and ensure that nothing bad hap-
pens to you. There are several problems with this line of
reasoning. First, though your doctor may be extremely
knowledgeable, she or he is also human and cannot keep
up with all the new information that is emerging, no matter
how smart she or he may be. Second, even if your doctor
told you about every conceivable drug interaction, there is
no way you could remember all of them! And third, in this
era of managed care, doctors are having to manage more
and more patients, and you may get only a few minutes
with your prescribing physician at infrequent intervals to
review your symptoms and the dose of the medication.
There may simply not be enough time to discuss all the
possible drug interactions you need to know about.

How and Why Do These Drug Interactions
Occur?

There are four basic ways that two drugs can interact.
First, one drug can cause the level of a second drug in your
blood to increase—sometimes to an alarming degree, even
though you are taking only a ‘‘normal’’ dose of both drugs.
What are the consequences of a sudden increase in the level
of a drug in your blood? First, you may experience more
side effects, since they are usually related to the dose. Sec-
ond, many psychiatric drugs lose their effectiveness when
the dose is too high or too low. And third, there can be

508 David D. Burns, M.D.

toxic and even fatal reactions when the blood level of any
drug becomes too high.

A second type of drug interaction is just the opposite.
One drug can cause the level of another drug in your blood
to decrease. This can cause the second drug to become in-
effective, even though you are taking a normal dose. You
and your doctor may wrongly conclude that the drug does
not work for you when the real problem is that your blood
level is too low.

A third type of interaction is when two drugs each have
similar effects or side effects that intensify each other. Sup-
pose, for example, that you are being treated for high blood
pressure and then you begin to take a psychiatric drug that
also lowers blood pressure as a side effect. The result could
be that you might experience a sudden drop in blood pres-
sure and possibly even faint when you suddenly stand up.

A fourth and more ominous type of drug interaction is
not related to changes in blood levels but simply to toxic
effects of certain drug combinations. In other words, two
drugs that are safe when taken separately may lead to ex-
tremely dangerous interactions when you take them to-
gether.

Now let’s examine the first two types of drug interactions
in more detail. Why does one drug sometimes cause the
level of a second drug to increase or fall dramatically?
Well, a simple way to think about it would be to imagine
that you are trying to fill a bathtub with water. If the plug
is out, the water will have a tendency to go out as fast as
it comes in. As a result, the water level in the tub will not
go up high enough to take a bath, no matter how long you
leave the faucet on. In contrast, if the plug is in the tub and
you don’t turn the water off, the tub will overflow.

Now compare your body to the bathtub. (I do not mean
to imply that you have a bad figure!) The medicine you
take each day is like the water coming into the tub. Certain
enzyme systems in your liver can be compared to the hole
in the bottom of the tub. These enzymes in your liver chem-
ically change drugs into other substances (called ‘‘metab-

FEELING GOOD 509

olites’’) that your kidneys can get rid of more easily. This
process is called ‘‘metabolism.’’ Metabolites of the drugs
you take usually end up in your urine.

When you add a second drug, your liver may metabolize
the first drug more slowly. This would be comparable to
plugging up the hole at the bottom of the tub. And so, as
you keep taking the first medicine, your blood level gets
too high, in just the same way that the water in the tub gets
too high and eventually spills over the side. Or the second
drug you take could have the opposite effect of making the
hole in the bottom of the tub much bigger. In this case,
your liver’s metabolism speeds up and rids your body of
the first drug much faster. In this case, you may keep taking
the same dose of the first drug each day but your blood
level remains too low to have the desired antidepressant
effect. In this case, the water goes out of the tub just as
fast as it comes in.

That’s pretty much the basic principle. The drugs that
are likely to interact with each other are those that are meta-
bolized by the ‘‘cytochrome P450’’ enzyme systems in the
liver. There are many of these enzyme systems, and differ-
ent kinds of drugs are metabolized by different enzyme
systems. Only certain drugs or combinations of drugs will
stimulate or inhibit any of these enzyme systems. Psychi-
atric drugs can interact with other psychiatric and nonpsy-
chiatric drugs, such as antibiotics, antihistamines, or
painkillers. In other words, psychiatric drugs can affect
other drugs your doctor may prescribe (such as a pill for
high blood pressure), in exactly the same way that those
other drugs can have an impact on any psychiatric drugs
you may be taking. The bottom line is that the level of any
drug you are taking might become too high or too low if
you are also taking another drug at the same time.

Let me now give you some specific examples of these
drug interactions. Suppose you are taking one of the new
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors called paroxetine
(trade name Paxil). This drug is very similar to Prozac.
Now suppose that the paroxetine is not working very well,

510 David D. Burns, M.D.

which sometimes happens, and you are still feeling de-
pressed. Your doctor might decide to add a second anti-
depressant. If your doctor chooses desipramine (trade name
Norpramin), the paroxetine you are taking will have the
effect of ‘‘plugging up the tub.’’ Now your body will not
be able to metabolize the new drug (desipramine) very well.
As a result, your blood level of desipramine may increase
to three to four times higher than expected. Most psychia-
trists are aware of this drug interaction and will be careful
to prescribe desipramine in a tiny dose if a patient is taking
an SSRI like paroxetine. But if your psychiatrist was not
aware of this particular drug interaction and decided to give
you a ‘‘normal’’ dose of desipramine, you could develop a
toxic level of desipramine in your blood.

Is this serious? Well, there are three potential problems.
First, desipramine is not effective at excessively high blood
levels. Second, there will be many more side effects at high
levels. And third, in rare instances, excessive blood levels
of desipramine can trigger abnormal heart rhythms and oc-
casionally even cause death.

Is this type of drug interaction rare? No. The levels of
antidepressants can sometimes increase or decrease quite
dramatically when combined with common prescription or
over-the-counter drugs you might take without thinking
twice. The tables in Chapter 20 will delineate the interac-
tions most important to any antidepressant you might be
taking.

Finally, some toxic and dangerous drug interactions do
not necessarily depend on doses or blood levels. For ex-
ample, many of the newer antidepressants such as Prozac
have powerful effects on the serotonin systems in the brain.
The monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) also affect the
serotonin systems in the brain, but through a different
mechanism. The antidepressant tranylcypromine (trade
name Parnate) is an example of one of these MAOI drugs.
If you take Prozac and Parnate at the same time, the com-
bination could trigger an extremely dangerous reaction
known as the “‘serotonin syndrome.’’ The symptoms can

FEELING GOOD 511

include fever, muscle rigidity, and rapid changes in blood
pressure, along with agitation, delirium, seizures, coma, and
death. Obviously, this combination of drugs should not be
given!

You will see in Chapter 20 that many medications can
be dangerous if you are taking an MAOI. The list of for-
bidden drugs includes many antidepressants, some decon-
gestants (especially if they contain dextromethorphan, a
common ingredient of cold preparations), antihistamines,
local anesthetics, some anticonvulsants, some painkillers
such as meperidine (Demerol), antispasmodics including
cyclobenzaprine (Flexeril) and weight-loss preparations.
Some of these drugs will cause the serotonin syndrome de-
scribed above, and some of them will cause another dan-
gerous reaction known as a “‘hypertensive crisis.’’ In
extreme cases, the symptoms of a hypertensive crisis in-
clude brain hemorrhage, paralysis, coma, and death. Certain
common foods such as cheese are also on the ‘‘forbidden’’
list if you are taking one of the MAOIs, because they can
cause a hypertensive crisis as well.

Many doctors do not prescribe the MAOIs because of
concerns about these toxic interactions. You may also
think: ‘‘Well, I will just take a safer drug so I won’t have
to worry.’’ This makes good sense, since many safer med-
ications are available. However, many commonly pre-
scribed antidepressants can cause dangerous interactions.
For example, two common antidepressants, nefazodone
(trade name Serzone) and fluvoxamine (trade name Luvox)
should not be combined with several commonly prescribed
drugs because these particular combinations can trigger an
abnormal heart rhythm that may result in sudden death. The
drugs include terfenadine (trade name Seldane and used for
allergies), astemizole (trade name Hismanal and used for
allergies), or cisapride (trade name Propulsid, a stimulant
for the gastrointestinal tract).

I do not mean to give the impression that it is dangerous
to take antidepressant drugs. To the contrary, they are usu-
ally quite safe and effective, and the catastrophic drug in-

512 David D. Burns, M.D.

teractions I have described are fortunately rare. In addition,
most psychiatrists go to great lengths to educate themselves
about recent developments and try to keep up with new
information about side effects and drug interactions. But in
the real world we live in, no doctor is perfect and no doctor
can have comprehensive knowledge about all possible drug
interactions. For example, your primary care physician may
not be familiar with some new antidepressant your psychi-
atrist has prescribed. And so a little research on your part
will be helpful. As an enlightened consumer, you can read
about any antidepressant medicine you are taking in Chap-
ter 20 and in other readily available references such as the
Physician’s Desk Reference (PDR). You can find these
books at any library, bookstore, or pharmacy. You can also
find the PDR at your doctor’s office. You can also review
the drug insert that comes with the medication. It doesn’t
take more than five or ten minutes to review this infor-
mation. Then you can ask informed questions and bring out
the best in your physician. The teamwork can give you a
safer and better experience with your antidepressant. This
is definitely one case where an ounce of prevention can be
worth more than a pound of cure.

Chapter 20

The Complete Consumer's Guide to
Antidepressant Drug Therapy*

(Notes and References appear on pages 682-687.)

In this chapter I will give you practical information about
the costs, doses, side effects, and drug interactions for all
the currently available antidepressant and mood-stabilizing
drugs. I would recommend you use this chapter as a ref-
erence source rather than trying to read it all at once—there
is just too much detailed information to digest at one sitting.
If you want to learn about a particular drug that you or a
family member may be taking, the Table of Antidepressants
on pages 514-515 will help you locate the information you
need in this chapter. Let’s assume, for example, that you
are taking fluoxetine (Prozac). You can read the section on
the SSRI antidepressants starting on page 547. In addition,

“IT would like to thank Joe Bellenoff, M.D., a psychopharmacology fellow at Stanford
University Medical School, and Greg Tarasoff, M.D., a senior psychiatric resident
at Stanford, for helpful suggestions during the revision of this chapter. In addition,
much useful information was obtained form the excellent Manual of Clinical Psy-
chopharmacology, Third Edition, by Alan F. Schatzberg, M.D., Jonathan Cole, M.D.,
and Charles DeBattista, D.M.H., M.D. (Washington: American Psychiatric Press,
1997). This scholarly but highly readable book is an invaluable reference. I highly
recommend it for individuals who would like more information on the medications
currently used in the treatment of emotional problems.

513

514 David D. Burns, M.D.

Table of Antidepressants

Antidepressant Chemical Name Page #
Drug Class (and Trade Name)"
Tricyclic Antidepressants 524

amitriptyline (Elavil, Endep)
clomipramine (Anafranil)
desipramine (Norpramin, Pertofrane)
doxepin (Adapin, Sinequan)
imipramine (Tofranil)

nortriptyline (Aventyl)

protriptyline (Vivactil)

trimipramine (Surmontil)

Tetracyclic Antidepressants 524
amoxapine (Asendin)
maprotiline (Ludiomil)

SSRI Antidepressants 547
citalopram (Celexa)
fluoxetine (Prozac)
fluvoxamine (Luvox)
paroxetine (Paxil)
sertraline (Zoloft)

MAO Inhibitors 564
isocarboxazid (Marplan)
phenelzine (Nardil)
selegiline (Eldepryl)
tranylcypromine (Parnate)

Serotonin Antagonists 599
nefazodone (Serzone)
trazodone (Desyrel)

Other Antidepressants 605
bupropion (Wellbutrin) 605
venlafaxine (Effexor) 611
mirtazapine (Remeron) 615

FEELING GOOD 515

Antidepressant Chemical Name Page #
Drug Class (and Trade Name)"
Mood Stabilizers 617
carbamazepine (Tegretol) 640
gabapentin (Neurontin) 651
lamotrigine (Lamictal) 652
lithium (Eskalith) 617
valproic acid (Depakene) and 634

divalproex sodium (Depakote)

“Many of the antidepressants are now available as generic brands (see Table 20-1).
Only the trade names of the original brands are listed in this table.

the section on drug costs starting on this page, as well as
the information starting on page 659, should be of general
interest to all readers.

Costs of Antidepressant Medications

We often think that more expensive means better, but this
is not always the case with antidepressants. As it turns out,
there are some very dramatic differences in the costs of the
different antidepressants that do not reflect differences in ef-
fectiveness. In other words, sometimes a drug that is much
cheaper will be just as effective, or even more effective, than
another drug that costs more than forty times more.
Therefore, if the cost of the medication is a concern for you,
then a little education may save you a great deal of money.

The costs and doses of the most commonly prescribed
antidepressants and mood stabilizing agents are listed in
Table 20-1 on pages 518-523. Note that I am quoting the
cheapest wholesale price for each antidepressant drug in
Table 20-1. The retail price you pay for the same medi-
cation at the drug store will probably be higher. If you
choose a different brand of the same medication, it may be
higher yet. Please keep this in mind in all of the following
discussions of drug costs.

If you compare the costs of the different types of drugs

516 David D. Burns, M.D.

and the different doses, it will provide you with some in-
teresting information. You will see, for example, that many
of the older tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs are now available
generically. When a drug is first manufactured, the drug
company gets a seventeen-year patent so it can market the
drug exclusively. The relatively high cost of the newer
drugs that are still protected by patents helps to cover the
costs of the research, development, and testing. After the
patent expires, other companies can compete and manufac-
ture the drug, and so the price goes down drastically.

You will see in Table 20-1 that these so-called ‘‘ge-
neric’’ medications are much less costly than the newer
drugs that are still under patent. Let’s assume that your
doctor prescribes a dose of 150 mg per day of imipramine
for your depression. The cost of the three 50-mg pills you
will take will be less than 10 cents per day, or roughly $3
per month. This is because imipramine is now available
generically. In contrast, if your doctor prescribes two 20-
mg Prozac pills per day, your cost will be nearly $4.50 per
day or $135 per month—over forty times more than the
imipramine. And if she or he prescribes four Prozac pills—
the maximum dose—your cost will be $270 per month.
This is a steep price for many people. Don’t forget these
are wholesale prices—you may pay even more.

Is Prozac forty to a hundred times more effective than
imipramine? Definitely not. As you will learn below, most
of the antidepressants tend to be comparably effective. Re-
search studies have not confirmed that Prozac is any more
effective than imipramine—in fact it may be slightly less
effective for severe depressions. However, the big advan-
tage of Prozac is that it has fewer side effects (such as dry
mouth or sleepiness) than imipramine. This may be quite
important to some people and may make the price differ-
ence worthwhile. On the other hand, you will learn that
Prozac has some side effects of its own, such as problems
with sexual functioning (difficulty achieving orgasm) 1n as
many as 30 percent to 40 percent of patients, and possibly
more. People who don’t like this particular side effect might
actually prefer the cheaper medication.

FEELING GOOD 517

You will also see in Table 20-1 that pills which contain
a larger quantity of a particular drug are not necessarily
more expensive than pills which contain a smaller quantity.
This is especially true if you are taking one of the newer
drugs that is still under patent, so you may be able to save
money by buying pills containing a larger dose. For ex-
ample, you will see in Table 20-1 that the cost of a hundred
nefazodone (Serzone) tablets is $83.14 for the 100-mg size.
The price for a hundred tablets of the larger sizes (150 mg
to 250 mg) is exactly the same. So if you are taking a large
dose, say 500 mg per day, you could either take five of the
100-mg pills (cost of $4.16 per day) or two of the 250-mg
pills (cost of $1.66 per day).

In addition, you can often save money by buying a larger
size of a medication and breaking a pill in half. So to con-
tinue with the same example, if you are taking 250-mg
pills, it will cost you approximately half as much if you
purchase 500-mg pills and break them in half.

For the generic drugs, things are different. On the aver-
age, the costs are low overall and depend on the dose, and
the savings at higher doses are not so drastic. In addition,
because so many different companies manufacture these
drugs, the prices for the different doses are not always en-
tirely consistent—sometimes a smaller dose will actually
cost more than a larger dose. For example, look at the pric-
ing structure for the tricyclic antidepressant, desipramine
(trade name Norpramin) on page 518. You will see that a
hundred of the 10-mg pills cost $15.75, while a hundred of
the 25-mg pills costs only $7.14. So the larger pill is ac-
tually cheaper. This is because different companies manu-
facture the two sizes.

To make things even more confusing, there are other
cases where a larger dose costs substantially more and you
can save money by taking a smaller size. For example, take
another look at the costs of desipramine on page 518. You
will see that a hundred 75-mg desipramine pills cost
$12.42, and that a hundred 150-mg desipramine pills cost
$109.95 (again, because of different manufacturers). So you

CT IIS SUI OOT

€6'8$ Bul CL
09°9$ SU QS
crs BUI CZ
Sox 3 OOF-OST 86'C$ sul QI uenboauls uldoxop
66 601$ SW OST
63 0r$ su OOT
Zy7I$ Bul CL
L6OI$ BU OS
PLS SUI CZ
SOX 3 QO€-OST CLST$ 3Ul O[ uTUIeIdION ouTUeIdIsop
L6O8EI$ BU CL
LS SOI$ BUI OS
ON BUI OSZ-OSI 67 8L$ sul CZ [lueyeuy suTuresdrwuo[9
60°7$ Su OCT
87 r$ Bu QOT
Ece$ Bul CL
SL 7$ SWI OC
CS I$ BU CZ
Sox BUI OOE-SL EL I$ Bu OT . [ARTA oul AJGLyTUNe

syuvssaidapynuy dA],

21 QU]IDAY
souuguay

aly

pasuvy .

asog A]10q

Sd OOL 42d Iso) ayvsajoyy,
jsadvay) x? (8) sazig ajqvjivay

gauvn (puvig) apvos] paulDN JDIIUAYD

SUOIBIPSy] JUBSSeidaphuy jo s]JSOD puke ‘sesog ‘soweN "1-07 aIqeL

sox

3 SZZ-OSI

BUI OSP-0S1

BUI C/

[FUOTpN’T

ulpussy

ouTpHoideul

ourldexoure

sjuvssaidapyuy d1p949e8.199 7,

OT LSI$ BUI QOT
v1 Sorg BUI (QS

ON SUI OOE-OST 80'79$ BUI CZ [HuOULINS suTUeId TUL
9¢'L9$ Bu OT

ON Bul (09-S] Or 9r$ BU ¢ [HOBALA autyAydtyoid
ES b7$ BUI CL
Ev 61$ BUI QS
06'°ST$ BUI CZ

SOX BU OST—-0S SS II$ Bu QT [AIUDAY out AIdiyI0U
CL E61$ BUI OCT
C6 691$ SUI CZ]
67 IETS BU OO] (aseo[al pourejsns)

ON BUI OOE-OST LO €OI$ BUI C/ Wd-[tueyoL sjeowed aurureldiun
80'E$ BUI 0S
c£7$ BUI CZ

sox BUI OOE-0ST 88'T$ sul Q] jueyoy | eprorysospAy ourmerdrun

o1quyTeaeun BUI QS-OI oyquyearun sul OT ue[dieyl pizexoqeoos!
ON 03° Sr$ BUI OT oyeuleg oumuoidAaTAueny
ON 06'S17$ sul ¢ [Ardoprg oUur[Isayas

ON v7 OV$ [IpreN guizjouaud

s10yiqryuy OVW

EC TSI Bul OOT

ON BU 0O7-SZ ETOLI$ BU OS YO]OZ oUITeILIas
08 PIZ$ BU OE
07 681$ BUI 07
ON sul OS-Ol EL 681$ BUI 0] [Ixed ounexored
LEvOT$ 3 00T
ON SUE (0E-OS L9°861$ BUI OC XOAN’] ounmexoany
pS V77$ Bu OZ
ON Bu 08-01 LY 817$ Bul OT OeZOIg ouexony
00'89T$ BUI OP
BU (09-07 OO'T9TS$ BU OZ BX9]9D wreidojeyto

sjuessoidepyuy NISS

291 QUIIDAV
Souauay

aly

p23uDy
asog «jpg

SI11d OOT 42d 180) appsajoyy,
Isadvay) 2» (8) Saz1g ajqojivay

g@UvN (puoig) appa] pIUdDA] JDIMUIY)

“yuo” *T-07 FAB L

ON BUI CP-CT 00° 86I$ SUI C] UOIOWIDY ouidezey nu

EC 9C7$ BUI OST
PULIZ$ BUI C/ (sojnsdes oseoy
ON BUI CLE-SL 88°C6I$ BU CLE -OY popusixg) WX s10xXaJq
SLSZI$ BU OOT
99'°8II$ Bu C/
C6 TII$ BU OS
89° 80I$ BU CLE
ON Bu CLE-CL ES Sols BUI CZ JOXxajq OUIXEJE[UDA
96°78$ BU OOT
ON BU OSP-00Z LVZ9$ BU CL ULTINGTIOM uordordnq

sjuessaidspnuy UNIO

BUI OOF—-OST JorAsaq ouopozey

BUI OOS-O0E QUOZIIS quopozejau

S}SIUOSEJUY UIN0}013S


ON

ON

ON

SOR

SOK

sox

aly

29 QD]IDAY
sotauay

BUI 0007-006

48Ul QST-OS
BUI OOOE-OSL
BUI OOOE-OSL

BUI 00ZI-008

y8Ul OOST-006

pAsUuvy
asog «jivg

OV CII$
OS P6$
O8'LE$
CO CHIS
Ey ysis
pS SLT$

80°71 1$
91'09$
c6'0E$
86'71$
80°OI$
LO vI$¢
08° SEs
ES CT$
ETEI$S
C7 S$
C9 L$

SIid OO] 42d Iso ajvsajoyy
jsadvay) x? (su) sazig ayqvjiway

Bul OOP
BUI OOF
Bu OO
BUI O07
BUI OCT
sul OOT
(sul CZ

BUI OOS
BU YSZ
BUI CZ]
BUI OSZ
BU (OZ
Bul OOT
BUI OS
BUI OOF
BU 009
BUI OOE
BU OST

sSTOZTIQG}S pool

q@UwoN (PudlG) apd]

UIUOININ

peyonwe’y

j0yedaq
ouayedaq

[030189],

(aseafal poute}
“Sns) YD YyNTeAs_ “prgoywy]

ue ysA

unjuodeqes

OUISLIOWP]

UWINIPOS XdOJd]eAIp
pioe o1oidyea

ouidezeureqies

cuntyyt]

pautDN JDIMUAIY’)

yuo) *T-07 PBL

‘Aep tod Sur gos 03 3ur gog st Asdayido

JO} SSULI SSOP PaPUSUTUODAI OY} ‘QUOTE UDAIZ USA, “prose o1OId]eA (HIM wonounfuoo ur uaar1s usym Asdopida Joy o8ue asop papudsUNOdaI OU} SI STU],
‘(UOTIPS 8661) XYUaH s,Aqsop UI poyst] Jou sem JeIONUE] SUI sz oy Jo dou OUI;

‘Poof oWo popyuLds aq uRd yorym ‘(Sur ¢Z{) oPyULIdS ajoyedoq sv s[qeTTeAe osye st SIU],

‘soposida otuew Surmnp A[pidez szour wry ozroqriour 0} sreadde Apog ou asnesaq elueUr aynoe SuLINp posmbar 9q Avur sasop IJoYsIP,

‘SuTye) oq Avur NOX suONRoIpoUul JOO se [JOM se “WSTTOQuIOU [ENpPrArIpul puv ‘stsouseip ‘WYystam ‘“JIopues ‘ase mMoA

uo Sutpuadap ‘“juoned Yous Joy pozienpratpur ATYyZIY aq osOJOION) [TIM pue s}so} poojg Aq pasO}UOUT aq ISNUT sIOZT{IQUIS POOUT JeIOAOS JO SasOp dy Js
"SYIOM XIS 0} dn Jo spouiod Joy Bul ¢z7Z Jo WNUTxeUI BP poddx9 10

P[hoys asop oy} yey) sjsa38ns JomNjoejnuew sy] ‘poLtod popus}xa uv 10; Snap oy} UO Joy st juared e jr Aep Jod Sur C7] poooxa Jou prnoys ouynolde~,
‘oridxo sjuojed 3nip [euUIsLI0

Tay} UsYM spuvig ILOUNS se o[qu{TeAR SUIOIOq [IM SSnIp Juessomdopnue juauns oy} JO SIOW “866 Ul o[QuiTeAe spuviq S1I9Ua8 YIM SBnIp oe oso],
"9SOP OY} SUISUBYD d10JOq 10}D0P INOA IM JNSUOD skeMTY ‘yWoroysns oq Aeur asop sJoypeus wv ‘A19AOIAT BUIMOTIOJ ATessaoou st JuoUIveN poSuojoid Jy
‘OSUBI [LULIOU OY} ULL) JOMO] JO JOYSIY sasop Wo. W9uUEq AeU sjuaned autos ‘uorssaidap Jo oposida ue Jo JuUNveN oY} Joy pasn oq pinom S9SOP BU Ip
‘ysrovuLreyd nok Aq dnyseur at) uo puadap [IM pue oJOUr aq []IM 380d NOX "syunoosip jeroeds Aue jnoyIM Jonpo.d oy) 305

Aed 0} aavy prnom jstovurreyd jrejor [Loot AnoA dord oy} si sty], Post] St gjquireae Apusrmo puviq dAtsuodxo yseoy oy) JO sy{Id QO] 10J doud oTesofoum
a8eIOAR OYJ, “AQSOW ‘SNOT ‘IG ‘snug pupsg puv d1MauayH sof aPIND aduasafay ajajdwuog ayy :(uouIpy ylQ) 8661 “Yuan s,<qsopy :39.M0S 1809,
‘SOUU PUBIG UMO ITO} SALY SSMIP asa} JO SUOISIOA OLIQUDH ‘Palsi] si SNIP yeursrI0 oy) Jo oureU puLIq ou A[UQ,

‘SSMLIp oureu-apen oy} ueY) Apsoo ssoy YyonuT

9q WLS Jey) puviq OAISUadXoUT UL dININSQNs UdIJo UL ysIOvULIeYd MOK ‘uoNdiOsaId dy] UO SUC , OLIOUDS,, IO [eOTUMIAYD ay} saquiosaid 10}90p MOA JI,

524 David D. Burns, M.D.

can save lots of money by taking two 75-mg pills instead
of one 150-mg pill. Again, this is because different com-
panies manufacture the 75-mg and 150-mg sizes. This may
strike you as odd, but the pricing structure in some in-
stances is completely out of whack.

If you or a family member is taking an antidepressant,
make sure you study Table 20—1 and discuss these cost
issues with your druggist. A little quick and easy research
on your part may result in large savings.

Another important point, not illustrated in the table, is
that the cost of the same generic drug and dose can vary
greatly because the generics often have so many different
manufacturers. In Table 20-1, I have always listed the least
costly generic brand of each pill; other more costly versions
of the same pill are not listed. For example a hundred 50-
mg imipramine pills manufactured by the drug company
HCFA FFP will cost only $3.08. Because this was the
lowest-priced generic brand, I listed it in Table 20-1. In
contrast, a hundred of the same size imipramine manufac-
tured by Novartis, another drug company, will cost
$74.12—-more than twenty times more. Keep in mind that
if your doctor prescribes the antidepressant by its chemical
name (as listed in Table 20-1), your druggist will have the
freedom to provide you with the least costly generic brand
if one is available.

My goal is not to promote any one drug or class of drug.
All antidepressants have merit, and they all have some draw-
backs. The key point is this: more expensive does not always
mean better. If you review the costs of these drugs, you can
work with your doctor and pharmacist to choose the med-
ication and brand that will make the most sense for you.

Specific Kinds of Antidepressants

Tricyclic and Tetracyclic Antidepressants

The first drugs listed in the Table of Antidepressants on
page 514 are called ‘‘tricyclic’’ and “‘tetracyclic’’ antide-

FEELING GOOD 525

pressants. The tricyclic and tetracyclic antidepressants dif-
fer slightly in their chemical structures. ‘‘Tri’’ means three
and ‘‘tetra’’ means four. ‘‘Cyclic’’ refers to a circle or ring.
The tricyclic compounds consist of three linked molecular
rings, while the tetracyclics consist of four.

You will see that eight tricyclic and two tetracyclic an-
tidepressants are listed in the Table of Antidepressants. The
eight tricyclic drugs include amitriptyline (Elavil), clomi-
pramine (Anafranil), desipramine (Norpramin), doxepin
(Sinequan), imipramine (Tofranil), nortriptyline (Aventyl),
protriptyline (Vivactil), and trimipramine (Surmontil).
These eight tricyclic drugs used to be the most widely pre-
scribed antidepressants. They are still among the most ef-
fective of all the antidepressants. Many of them are also
the least expensive because generic brands have become
available. However, tricyclics tend to have more side ef-
fects than the newer drugs, and so they are less popular
than they used to be. By the same token, they have been
prescribed for several decades and have a long track record
of reasonably good effectiveness and safety.

The two tetracyclic antidepressant medications listed on the
table are called amoxapine (Asendin) and maprotiline (Lu-
diomil). These two tetracyclics were synthesized and released
after the tricyclics had been in use for some time. It was hoped
that they would represent significant improvements in treat-
ment, either because of increased effectiveness for certain
types of depression, or because of fewer side effects.

Unfortunately, these expected improvements did not re-
ally materialize. For the most part, the effectiveness, mech-
anism of action, and side effects of the eight tricyclic and
the two tetracyclic antidepressants are quite similar.

Doses for the Tricyclic and Tetracyclic Antidepres-
sants. Table 20-1 on pages 518-523 lists the costs and
dose ranges of the eight tricyclic and the two tetracyclic
antidepressant medications. As noted above, many of them
are inexpenSive because they are no longer on patent, and
So generic brands are readily available. Don’t be fooled into

526 David D. Burns, M.D.

thinking the cheaper antidepressants are less effective, how-
ever. A number of studies suggest they may be slightly
more effective than many of the newer antidepressants such
as Prozac.

The most common error your doctor is likely to make is
to prescribe a dose of a tricyclic antidepressant that is too
low. This statement may run against your grain if you feel
you should take the lowest dose possible. In the case of
tricyclics, if the prescribed dose is too low, the medication
will not be effective. If you insist on taking a dose that is
too low, you may be wasting your time. It simply will not
help you. On the other hand, dosages above those recom-
mended in Table 20-1 can be dangerous and may lead to
a worsening of your depression.

Having said that, let me also say that there are cases in
which people do respond to doses that are smaller than those
listed (especially the elderly), and there are also times when
people may need larger doses. One reason for this is that
there can be considerable differences in how rapidly people
metabolize antidepressant drugs. These differences are par-
tially genetic, and are due to levels of certain enzymes in
your liver, as described previously. If you are a ‘‘fast meta-
bolizer’’ you will need a larger dose to maintain an effective
blood level, and if you are a ‘‘slow metabolizer’’ you will
need a smaller dose. In addition, you will learn below about
other drugs that can make tricyclic blood levels fall and
lose their effectiveness or increase and become more toxic.

If you suspect you may be taking an inappropriately large
or small dose, review the dose ranges in Table 20—1 and
discuss your concerns with your physician. Blood-level
testing for most of the tricyclic antidepressants is readily
available, so your doctor may order a blood test to make
sure that the dose you are taking is neither too high nor too
low for you.

The best way to begin taking a tricyclic medicine is to
start out with a small dose and to increase the amount each
day until a dose within the normal therapeutic range is
achieved. This buildup can usually be completed within one

FEELING GOOD 527

or two weeks. For example, a typical daily dose schedule
for imipramine, one of the most commonly prescribed tri-
cyclic antidepressant drugs listed in Table 20-1, might be
the following:

Day one—50 mg at bedtime;
Day two—75 mg at bedtime;
Day three—100 mg at bedtime;
Day four—125 mg at bedtime;
Day five—150 mg at bedtime.

You and your doctor may prefer to build up the dose a
bit more gradually. Doses of up to 150 mg per day can be
conveniently taken once a day at night. The antidepressant
effect will last all day long, and the most bothersome side
effects will occur at night, when they will be least noticed.
If doses larger than 150 mg per day are required, the ad-
ditional medicine should be given in divided doses during
the daytime.

For the more sedating tricyclic antidepressants, up to half
the maximum indicated dose may be taken on a once-per-
day basis before bedtime. This dosage promotes sleep. Sev-
eral of the tricyclic antidepressants, including desipramine,
nortriptyline, and protriptyline, can be stimulating. They
can be taken in divided doses in the morning and at noon.
If taken too late in the day, they may interfere with sleep.

If you reduce the dose of a tricyclic antidepressant or if
you decide to stop taking the medicine, it is best to reduce
the dose gradually and never abruptly. Sudden discontinu-
ation of any antidepressant may result in side effects. These
include upset stomach, sweating, headache, anxiety, or in-
somnia. Usually, you can go off a tricyclic antidepressant
safely and comfortably by tapering the dose gradually over
a one- or two-week period.

Side Effects of the Tricyclic Antidepressants. The most
frequent side effects of the tricyclic antidepressants are
listed in Table 20-2 on pages 530-532. You will see in
this table that all the tricyclic antidepressants have quite a
number of side effects, and this is their greatest drawback.

528 David D. Burns, M.D.

The most common side effects include sleepiness, dry
mouth, a mild hand tremor, temporary light-headedness
when you suddenly stand up, weight gain, and constipation.
They can also cauSe excessive sweating, difficulties with
sex, twitches or jerking when you fall asleep at night, and a
number of other effects listed in Table 20-2. Most of these
side effects are not dangerous, but they can be annoying.

You learned earlier that the side effects of antidepressant
drugs can be predicted if you know how strongly they block
histamine receptors, alpha-adrenergic receptors, and mus-
carinic receptors (also called cholinergic receptors) in the
brain. You can see from Table 20-2 that each antidepres-
sant has a different profile of side effects depending on its
action on these three receptor systems in the brain.

Blockade of the brain’s histamine receptors makes you
hungry and sleepy. Table 20-2 indicates that four of the
tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline, clomipramine, dox-
epin, and trimipramine) have rather strong effects on the
histamine receptors. Consequently, these four antidepres-
sants are more likely to make you feel sleepy and hungry.
If you are having trouble sleeping, this side effect could be
a benefit, but if you are already feeling sluggish and un-
motivated, these drugs may make things worse for you. If
you have been losing weight due to depression, the appetite
boost could be beneficial. However, if you are overweight,
you might have to pay more attention to your diet and ex-
ercise more in order to avoid weight gain, which can be
demoralizing. Since there are now many available antide-
pressants that do not cause weight gain, it might be better
to switch to one of them. You can see in Table 20-2 that
three of the tricyclics (desipramine, nortriptyline, and pro-
triptyline) have only weak effects on the histamine recep-
tors. These antidepressants will be less likely to cause
sleepiness and weight gain. There are many antidepressants
in other categories as well that do not cause sleepiness and
weight gain.

You may also recall that blockade of the brain’s alpha-
adrenergic receptors causes a drop in blood pressure. This
can result in temporary light-headedness or dizziness when

FEELING GOOD 529

you suddenly stand up because your leg veins become more
relaxed, and blood temporarily pools in your legs. As a
result, your heart temporarily does not have enough blood
to pump up to your brain, and so your vision may get black
and you may feel dizzy or woozy for a few seconds. An-
tidepressants with relatively strong effects on the brain’s
alpha-adrenergic receptors will be more likely to cause
dizziness when you suddenly stand up. You will see in
Table 20-2 that many tricyclics have strong effects on
alpha-adrenergic receptors, but that two of them (desipra-
mine and nortriptyline) have only weak effects on them.
Consequently, these two drugs are less likely to cause diz-
ziness or a drop in blood pressure.

Finally, blockade of the brain’s muscarinic receptors
causes side effects such as dry mouth, constipation, blurred
vision, difficulties getting your urine flow started, and a
speeding up of the heart, even when you are resting. Be-
cause of these effects on the heart, the tricyclic medications
in Table 20-2 with the strongest effects on these muscarinic
receptors may not be advisable for patients with cardiac
problems. Drugs with strong anticholinergic effects can also
create problems with memory. Many patients have told me
that they cannot remember a word they want to use, or they
forget someone’s name when they take these drugs. The
memory effects are dose-related and should disappear when
you stop taking the drug.

You can see that two of the tricyclic drugs in Table 20-2
(desipramine and nortriptyline) have relatively weak anti-
cholinergic effects. These two drugs will be the least likely
to cause side effects like dry mouth and forgetfulness.
These two also tend to have weaker effects on the hista-
minic and alpha-adrenergic receptors. Because they have
fewer side effects, they are among the most popular tri-
cyclic antidepressants.

The effects of antidepressant drugs on these three brain re-
ceptor systems do not completely explain all their side effects.
In the right-hand column, I have listed many of the more com-
mon or significant side effects for each drug. For example,
you will see that some of them can cause skin rashes.

JeNXdS poqinjsip ‘sesueyo yen.ysucul
‘SulyeULIN J,qnoy ‘ules yYysIoM
‘uolyedysuos ‘ayjedde jo ssoj
‘yovuroys Josdn ‘yynow AIp (NDq
jeuliouge ‘preay popadads ‘ssourzzip

uoIsNJUuo

-BIUWIOSUI ‘SSOUPoIT] “IOWISI)
‘oyoepeoy ‘ssouyeom ‘suryeams
‘SIBVO Ul SUIBULI {UOISIA paLinyq
‘SuueuLn sqnon ‘ures 1yZIOM
‘uoledisuos ‘yynow AIp ‘NDq
jewouge ‘yesYy popeods ‘ssourzzip

siaffq apis
JUDIYIUBIC 40 UOUNUO)

+++ 0) ++

+++

S40jdaoad

(WA) atu1avosnu

uoljuajay Caoup

yavay papaads ‘yinow «iq
‘UONDAISUOD ‘UOISIA Passing

+++

+++

saojdazad ("9 )
NSAIUAAPD-DY do

SSOUIZZIG] puv
SsaupapvaH -1Yy sry

(Hueayeuy)
+++ 01) +4 ouruerdruroyo
(dapug
+++ HARTA) VuTpAICLy TUL
S40jdaraa

(CH) auiuvysty 4o}da2ay uiwig

,UIDE) 14S1A/

pup uoyvpas Haq apis

‘$]09JJO OPIS snoJasuep Inq

alel SB [Jam Se ‘palsy are sjuatyed JO dIOUI IO YO] IO %G ul N90 Jey) SjOoJJo apis ‘Je1oues Uy “AAISUDYSIGUUIOD JOU ST IST] SIN], 79}0N

esjuesseidepyuy OOAOU | JO S|O@eY apis “Z-Oz a1qeL

uOTJe[NUIT}S
Jo Ajorxue ‘uoIsnjuos ‘ssouyeom
JOWIH ‘uonedysuos ‘ynow Arp

UONLINWINS ‘WYSI] OF ATAINISUAS
SOINZIOS SYSeI ‘UOTe[NUIS ‘Ajorxue
-CIUWIOSUT ‘Sssaupan} ‘oyoepeay
‘SSOUYVOM ‘BUIJVOMS SUOISIA palin]
‘SUTCULIN o[QnoO ‘ules JYyZIOM
‘uonedysuos ‘yynow Ap ‘(Qgq
eulouge ‘yesy popsads ‘ssourtzzip

SSoUTdaa{S ‘BUIyBaMS SUOISIA
pony ‘ules jy38I0om ‘uonedysuos
‘yInou AIp ‘jeoy popaoads ‘ssourzzip

uone[NuUIIs
“BIUWUOSUI foyoepeoy ‘Ajorxue
‘Uoneyse ‘soysel ‘yInoU! AIp

SdaINZIas ‘ysel ‘ayoepeoy

‘AJOIXUL SVIUWOSUI ‘ssoupely ‘10uIan
‘sdureio sposnul ‘ssouyeom ‘B8unvems
‘UOISIA poling ‘Suluonouny

++

+++ 01 +4

+++ 0} ++

++ 04

+++ 0} ++

+++

++ 01+

++

+++

(tAjuaay)
sur Aj di.4.10u

(jyuwajoy)
suTuIeIdiun

(uenbouis
‘uidepy) uidaxop

(9UB.1J0}.19g
‘UIUIe.Id.I0ON)
suIWIeIdIsap

‘BIUWOSUT 9ONpo djoy syuose sanepds oy) “Ys ye UdAIs
uayM “SNOAIOU ssoq nod ayeu pue noA wyeo AeuT Ady} ‘splom JoyIO UT ‘S}oayyo AJorxueNUe Jo}eaI3 savy osye ALUT DADEPas Jsour oY} o7e Jey SSNHP ou],

“Ioje] reoddesip

0} pua} pue sAep Moy ISIY OY} UT Jsa}RoIS AljeNsn oe S}99JJO apIg ‘osesop UT UOHONpol & Aq poZTUTUT 3q ULd ‘oUOSaTQnON JI ‘s}99]JO opis Aue,
“SSOUDATIOFJO BUIONPSI INOYIM SJooJJo Opis sonpor udIJo Wed ssop sy) BuIONpsy ‘st asop dy) a8ey Moy UO puadop osye []IM pue sTeNprArpul Suowe
AyeA [TM JOaHJo opis ay} Jo Ajtsuojut yenjoe oy, ‘dopoaop [IM 199}Jo opis seynonsed v yey) pooyoyt] oy} 0} Jofor [QI sty) UT sSuNeI +44 0} + OIe

P[Od JO Jeay 0} SOUBIO{OJUI ‘UOISNJUOS
‘ssourdagys ‘Joulan ‘aysepeoy
‘SSOUYBOM [SUNBOMS ‘UOISIA paLmy]q
‘ules JUSIOM ‘uonedysuos ‘your
AIp ‘OOq [eunlouge ‘amssaid poojq
PoSedIOUI IO PasBaldep ‘SSOUIZZIP

oyoepeay -UOTeTNUIT}S

‘BIUMIOSUI Sssouyeom ‘3uljeaMms
‘UOISIA poLin{g ‘uoyednsuos ‘vasneu
‘QO yeurlouqe ‘omssaid poojq
poseaIoUl 10 PosedIdap ‘SSOUIZZIp

syaffq apis
JuvdYfiusig 40 UuoWwuloy

+++ 0} +4 +++ O} ++
+++ ++ 03 +
ss0]darad saojdaaad (70)
(WW) I1ulavosnu I138.49Uad pD-DY dD

uolUuajay Cavuiy
‘Uvayy papaady ‘yinopw «ug SSaUuizziq] puv
‘UO1Ddsuoy ‘UOIS1A pasinjg | SSaupapvayy-1ysiT

+++

+ 010
s10jdaoad

(‘H) aununjsty

SUID) 148194
pup uoljppas

({uOULING)
DUTUIBICIUILT}

(1H98AIA)
auryAjdtajo1d

4ojdaday upg

pIaflfT apis

FEELING GOOD 533

Some tricyclics, most notably clomipramine (Anafranil),
Can Cause seizures, and so this drug would not be a good
choice for individuals with epilepsy.

If you and your doctor are choosing one of the antide-
pressants listed in Table 20-2, you might want to consider
the side-effect profile when making your choice. This is
because all these medications are comparably effective, so
their side effects may be the most important criteria for you
in deciding among them. So if you are having trouble sleep-
ing at night, one of the more sedative antidepressants may
be useful. These sedative agents are also somewhat calming
and so they might be helpful if you are experiencing anx-
lety.

Many of the side effects of the tricyclic antidepressants
listed in Table 20-2 occur in the first few days. With the
exception of dry mouth and weight gain, these side effects
frequently diminish as you become accustomed to the drug.
If you can simply put up with the side effects, many of
them will disappear after a few days. If the effects are
strong enough to make you uncomfortable, your doctor
may decide to reduce the dose, which usually helps.

Some side effects suggest you are taking an excessive
dose. These include difficulty in urination, blurred vision,
confusion, severe tremor, substantial dizziness, or increased
sweating. A dose reduction for such symptoms is definitely
indicated. A stool softener or laxative can help if consti-
pation develops. As noted above, light-headedness is most
likely to occur when you stand up suddenly, because the
blood flow to your brain is temporarily diminished. The
dizzy feeling usually persists for only a few seconds. If you
get up more carefully and slowly, or 1f you exercise your
legs before standing (by tightening and then relaxing your
leg muscles, as when you run in place), this should not be
a problem. The movement of your legs causes your leg
muscles to ‘‘pump’’ the blood back up to your brain. Sup-
port stockings can also help.

Some patients describe feeling “‘strange,’’ ““spaced out,”’
or ‘‘unreal’’ for several days when they first start taking a

534 David D. Burns, M.D.

tricyclic antidepressant. In my experience, one of the tri-
cyclics called doxepin (Sinequan) seems more likely to
cause this “‘spaced out’’ effect. When patients report feeling
strange on the first day or two of taking an antidepressant, I
usually advise them to stick with it. In nearly all cases the
sensation disappears completely within a few days.

If you give patients sugar pills (placebos) they think are
antidepressants, they will also report side effects that are
similar to the side effects reported by patients taking anti-
depressants. For example, in one study, 25 percent of the
patients taking clomipramine reported difficulties sleeping,
so you might conclude that this drug causes insomnia in a
quarter of those who take it. However, 15 percent of the
patients in the same study who received only placebo also
reported insomnia. So the likelihood of insomnia actually
caused by clomipramine would be 25 percent minus 15
percent, or 10 percent. Clearly, this side effect is ‘‘real,’’
but it is somewhat less common than you might at first
expect.

Such studies indicate that many “‘side effects’’ may not
actually be caused by the medication you are taking. Some
side effects may result from fears about the medication, or
from the depression itself, or from other stressful events in
your life such as a conflict with your spouse, rather than
from the drug itself.

Side Effects of the Tetracyclic Antidepressants. You
can see in Table 20-3 on pages 536-537 that the side ef-
fects of the tetracyclic antidepressants are similar to those
of the tricyclic antidepressants. However, they have some
special side effects of their own that should be considered
if you are taking one of these drugs. Maprotiline (Ludiomil)
appears to be more likely than the eight tricyclic antide-
pressant drugs to cause seizures, a particularly troublesome
side effect. Although the likelihood of seizures is low, pa-
tients with a history of seizures or head trauma should prob-
ably avoid this drug. Recent studies suggest that the
likelihood of seizures with maprotiline is significantly

FEELING GOOD 535

greater when the dose is increased too rapidly, or when
patients are kept on higher-than-recommended doses (225
to 400 mg per day) for more than six weeks.’® Therefore
the manufacturer has suggested that maprotiline should be
started and increased very slowly, and that the dose should
be maintained at no more than 175 mg per day if patients
take this drug for more than six weeks.

Amoxapine (Asendin) has a distinct and troublesome
type of side effect not shared with most other antidepres-
sants. This is because one of its metabolites blocks dopa-
mine receptors in the brain, much like antipsychotic drugs
such as chlorpromazine (Thorazine) and many others which
are used in the treatment of schizophrenia. Thus, patients
who take amoxapine can in rare instances develop some of
the same types of side effects that occur in patients who
take antipsychotic drugs. For example, women may expe-
rience galactorrhea (the production of milk by the breast.)
Any of several so-called ‘‘extrapyramidal’’ reactions can
also develop. One of them, called akathisia, is a motor rest-
lessness syndrome. This is an unusual kind of muscular
‘‘itchiness’’—your arms or legs feel intensely restless and
so you cannot sit still. You feel the compulsion to keep
moving or pacing about. Akathisia is uncomfortable but not
dangerous.

In rare instances amoxapine can also cause symptoms
that mimic Parkinson’s disease. Symptoms include passive
inactivity, a ‘“pill-rolling’’ tremor of the thumb and fingers
while at rest, decreased swinging of the arms when walk-
ing, stiffness, stooped posture, and others. If these symp-
toms develop, notify your doctor right away. She or he will
probably want you to stop the drug and try an alternative
medication. Although alarming, these symptoms are not
dangerous and should disappear when you stop taking the
amoxapine.

However, a more serious side effect of amoxapine (as
well as many other antipsychotic drugs) is called ‘‘tardive
dyskinesia.’’ Patients with tardive dyskinesia develop in-
voluntary, repetitious movements of the face, especially the

(sopyue Jo

BUI[[OMS) PUape “YSI] 0} AATIISUOS
‘UONPR[NUINS ‘somnzias ‘ssautdaeys
‘SOYUSeI SUOISIA paLinig ‘ures

J4SIOM ‘uUOedysuOd ‘yjnow AIp

oSIAN ‘Boys0}OR[es

‘BISOUTYSAP SAIPIE] ‘UOTIENUIYS
DAISSIOXS ‘SSOUSSO]JSOI [UOTIEJIL]
-qSdq -CIUWIOSUI ‘ssoupolly OUIO)
‘SOYSPI [UOISIA palnyq ‘8uyeuLMN
aqnoy ‘uolednsuos ‘jasdn yoru0ys

‘yjnoul Alp ‘yeoy papeaods ‘ssautzzip ++ 0} +

suojdaoaa
(CW) d1utavosnu

uoluajay Capuiy

JADaH papaads ‘yinow aq
‘uUOlDAYSUOD ‘UOISIA pasan]g

sjaaffyT apis
juvayfiusig 40 UuOWWOZ

+ ++
++ +
stojdazad ("90 ) s4ojdaoa

gissauaipo-vydjp | ('F7) auiunysiy

UID) 148194
pup uoljpvpas

SSaUIzZZIGq] puD
Ssaupapvayy-Jysry

(yarorpn’T)
suTyoi1deul

(uripussy) suldexoure

40jda0ay ulvig

oaffy apis

‘SJOOJJO APIS sNOJosuEp Inq sIvI
SB [JOM SC ‘pojst] aie syuatjed JO SIOUI JO YO] JO %C UL INDIO Jey} S}OaJJo OpIS ‘Je1oues uy “AATSUdYaIdUIOD JOU SI SIT SIU], :330N

esjupssaidepnuy ooA0ese] JO SOON BPIS "€-0Z ajqeL

"SUIJAYI UesY [eWUOUQeE pue ‘BuleaMs ssnjoid ‘yeay prides

‘ainssaid poojg Jo asind sepnZaun ‘snyeys [eUaW pasoyfe ‘soposnu pISiT ‘“IdAgy posealoul apnjoul swiojydwiAs ayy ‘(soudajoineu se uMouy
ose) S8nIp sHoYoAsdiue 0} UONOVAL UT SINd90 OSTe Jey} UOMOVEL [ere AypeNUS}Od v st sty, ‘aWOIpUAS jueusIfew IdajoINdU = SIND
"BISOUTYSAP SAIpse} pue SUOLOvaI StUO}SAp pur vISIyJeye Surpnpout (3X9) UL paquosop) swioydusAs peprueIAdeNxa = Sdda
"SSOUDATOIJJO SUIONPaI ynoyIM

S}99JJO OPIS BONPar UdJO ULd ssOp oY} ZulONpay ‘sl dsop oy} a3Ie] MOY UO puadap osTe [IM pue sjenplAIpul SuOW AeA [TIM y9IJO
OPIS ay} JO Aysuaput fenjoe ay] ‘dopsaap [IM 399JJo pts eNoed v yey) pooylpoyT] ay) 0} JoJo 9]qQuI SIy} UL SSUNLI +++ 0) + WLe

epee aepee semanas sinnemmnaped catemaye en ome -
caren “ sete ee hy e-card lc li ci env desir bp em raion arin ae pasar omaha aig Somer

538 David D. Burns, M.D.

lips and tongue. The abnormal movements can also involve
the arms and legs. Once it begins, tardive dyskinesia some-
times becomes irreversible or difficult to treat. The risk ap-
pears to be the highest among elderly women, but it can
occur with any patient. The risk of tardive dyskinesia also
increases the longer you have been on the drug, but it can
develop after only a brief period of treatment at a low dose.

Finally, as if that weren’t enough to frighten you, amox-
apine can, in rare cases, cause a dreaded complication
known as neuroleptic malignant syndrome, or NMS. NMS
consists of high fever, delirium, and muscle rigidity, along
with changes in blood pressure, heart rate and rhythm, and
sometimes death. All these risks should obviously be care-
fully balanced against any potential benefits of amoxapine;
it may sometimes be difficult to justify using this medica-
tion when so many equally effective and safer drugs are
readily available.

Tricyclic and Tetracyclic Antidepressant (TCA) Drug
Interactions. I described the problem of drug interactions
in Chapter 19. Briefly, when you are taking more than one
drug, there is a possibility that the drugs may interact in
ways that will be detrimental to you. One drug may cause
the level of the second drug to increase or decrease in your
blood. As a result, the second drug may cause excessive
side effects (if its blood level gets too high) or it may be-
come ineffective (if its blood level falls). In addition, some-
times the interaction of two drugs can lead to toxic
reactions that are quite dangerous.

A number of drug interactions for the tricyclic and tetra-
cyclic antidepressants are listed in Table 20-4 on pages
540-547. This list is not comprehensive, but it does include
many of the more common or important interactions. If you
are taking any other medications along with a TCA, it
would be wise to review this table. Note that both prescrip-
tion and nonprescription drugs are listed, including many
psychiatric and nonpsychiatric drugs as well. In addition,

FEELING GOOD 539

you should ask your physician and pharmacist if there are
any drug interactions among the drugs you are taking.

You can see in Table 20-4 that smoking cigarettes and
drinking alcohol can both cause the blood level of a TCA
to fall, thus reducing the likelihood that the drug will be
effective. Your doctor may need to do a blood test to find
out if your blood level is adequate. In addition, alcohol can
enhance the sedative effects of the tricyclic antidepressants,
a combination that can be quite hazardous if you are driving
or operating dangerous machinery.

Certain antidepressants can be particularly hazardous for
individuals with specific medical conditions. In particular,
the tricyclics can be dangerous to individuals with cardio-
vascular disease, including those with a previous heart at-
tack, abnormalities in heart rhythm, or high blood pressure.
Special precautions should also be taken for individuals
with thyroid disease. Make sure you mention any medical
problems you have to the doctor who is prescribing your
antidepressant so that she or he can take the proper precau-
tions.

As noted above, several of the tricyclic and tetracyclic
antidepressants can cause seizures in rare instances. An in-
cidence of seizures as high as 1 percent to 3 percent has
been reported with clomipramine, imipramine, and mapro-
tiline.’’ These estimates may be overly high. At any rate,
the risk can be reduced by making sure the dose is not
excessive and by raising the dose gradually. Nevertheless,
these drugs should be used with caution, if at all, in indi-
viduals with a history of seizure disorders, head trauma, or
other neurologic disorders associated with seizures. In ad-
dition, caution should be used if these drugs are combined
with other drugs that can lower the seizure threshold, such
as the major tranquilizers (neuroleptics) and others. Rapid
withdrawal from sedative agents, such as alcohol, minor
tranquilizers, and barbiturates can also trigger seizures, and
so clomipramine, imipramine, and maprotiline should be
used with great caution in combination with these agents.

540 David D. Burns, M.D.

Table 20-4. Drug Interaction Guide for Tricyclic and Tetracyclic
Antidepressants (TCAs)?

Note: The drugs in the left-hand column can interact with TCAs. The
comments describe the types of interactions. This list is not exhaustive;
new information about drug interactions comes out frequently. If you are
taking a TCA and any other medication, ask your doctor and pharmacist

if there are any drug interactions you should know about.

Antidepresssants

Drug
tricyclic and tetracyclic
antidepressants (TCAs can
interact with other TCAs)
SSRIs

MAOIs

serotonin antagonists,
including trazodone (Desyrel)
and nefazodone (Serzone)

bupropion (Wellbutrin)

venlafaxine (Effexor)

mirtazapine (Remeron)

Comment

desipramine causes an ¢ in
other TCAs—abnormal heart
rhythms can result

TCA levels can { (as much as
2- to 10-fold); abnormal heart
rhythms can result; SSRI
levels can also 7

serotonin syndrome ° [especially
clomipramine (Anafranil)];
low blood pressure;
hypertensive reactions

nefazodone may cause low
blood pressure

? in risk of seizures; extreme
caution required

probably okay; in theory TCA
could cause f in venlafaxine
blood levels

information not yet available

Antibiotics

Drug
chloramphenicol
(Chloromycetin)
doxycycline (Vibramycin)

isoniazid (INH, Nydrazid)

Comment
TCA levels and toxicity may f

TCA levels and effectiveness

may |
TCA levels and toxicity may f

FEELING GOOD 541

Antifungal Agents

Drug Comment
imidazoles such as fluconazole TCA levels may ff , especially
(Diflucan), itraconazole nortriptyline

(Sporanox), ketoconazole
(Nizoral) and miconazole
(Monistat vaginal
suppositories or cream)

griseofulvin (Fulvicin) TCA levels may |

Diabetes Medications

Drug Comment
insulin greater-than-expected drop in
blood sugar
oral hypoglycemic drugs greater-than-expected drop in

blood sugar

Medical Conditions

Condition Comment
glaucoma highly anticholinergic TCA can
trigger attacks of narrow-angle
glaucoma; symptoms include
eye pain, blurred vision, and
halos around lights

heart disease use TCA with extreme caution;
may trigger abnormal heart
rhythms

liver disease use TCA with caution; the

metabolism by the liver may
be impaired, with excessively
high blood levels and increased
side effects and toxic effects

seizure disorder use TCA with caution; TCA
may cause 7 in seizures
(TCA lowers the seizure
*“threshold’’)

thyroid disease use TCA with caution in
patients with thyroid disease
or those taking thyroid
medication; may trigger
abnormal heart rhythms

542 David D. Burns, M.D.

Medications for Abnormal Heart Rhythms

Drug Comment
disopyramide (Norpace) abnormal heart rhythms
epinephrine TCA may enhance the effects,
leading to rapid heart,
abnormal heart rhythms, and
* in BP

quinidine blood levels of quinidine and

TCA may 7; abnormal heart
rhythms and weakened heart
muscle can lead to congestive
heart failure

Medications for High Blood Pressure

Drug Comment
beta-blockers such as beta-blockers may cause
propranolol (Inderal) increased depression;

TCA may cause greater-
than-expected drop
in BP

clonidine (Catapres) TCA [e.g., desipramine
(Norpramin)] may reduce
effectiveness of clonidine
because blood levels |

calcium channel blockers BP drop may be greater than
expected
guanethidine (Ismelin) may lose antihypertensive effect

when combined with TCA
[e.g., desipramine
(Norpramin)]

methyldopa (Aldomet) BP drop may be greater than
expected, especially with
amitriptyline (Elavil); some
TCAs fe.g., desipramine
(Norpramin)] may reduce
the antihypertensive
effect

prazosin (Minipress) BP may f because levels of
prazosin may |

FEELING GOOD 543

Drug Comment
reserpine (Serpasil) may cause greater-than-expected
drop in BP; may also cause
excessive stimulation
thiazide diuretics such as blood-pressure drop may be
hydrochlorothiazide (Dyazide) greater than expected; effects
of TCA may increase

Medications for Low Blood Pressure
(for patients in shock)

Comment

TCA may enhance the effects,
leading to rapid heart,
abnormal heart rhythms, and

* in BP

Drug
epinephrine

Mood Stabilizers and Anticonvulsants

Comment

blood levels of TCA and
carbamazepine may | ; TCA
can make seizures more
likely

may enhance antidepressant
effects

blood levels of TCA may 7 or
|; TCA can make seizures
more likely

* in blood levels of
amitriptyline (Elavil) and
valproic acid

Drug
carbamazepine (Tegretol)

lithium (Eskalith)

phenytoin (Dilantin)

valproic acid (Depakene)

Pain Medications and Anesthetics

Drug Comment
acetaminophen (Tylenol) TCA levels may ¢;
acetaminophen levels may |
aspirin TCA levels may 7
halothane (Fluothane) TCA levels may 7; TCA with

strong anticholinergic effects
may cause abnormal heart
rhythms

544 David D. Burns, M.D.

Pain Medications and Anesthetics cont.

Drug Comment
cyclobenzaprine (Flexeril) (a may cause abnormal heart
muscle relaxant used to treat rhythms

muscle spasm)
methadone (Dolophine) may have greater-than-expected
narcotic effect; for example,
desipramine (Norpramin) may
double the blood level of
methadone
greater-than-expected narcotic
effect; lower doses of
meperidine or another
painkiller may be needed
greater-than-expected narcotic
effect and sedation; TCA
levels may |
abnormal heart rhythms,
especially TCA with strong
anticholinergic effects

meperidine (Demerol)

morphine (MS Contin)

pancuronium (Pavulon)

Sedatives and Tranquilizers

Drug Comment
alcohol May have enhanced sedative
effects. This could be
hazardous when driving or
operating dangerous
machinery. May cause TCA

levels to |
barbiturates (such as enhanced sedative effects; may
phenobarbital) cause TCA levels to |
buspirone (BuSpar) enhanced sedative effects as
described above
chloral hydrate (Noctec) TCA levels may |
ethchlorvynol (Placidyl) Temporary mental confusion has

been reported when combined
with amitriptyline (Elavil),
but could conceivably occur
with other TCAs as well

FEELING GOOD 545

Drug Comment
major tranquilizers levels of TCA and
(neuroleptics) phenothiazine neuroleptics

[such as chlorpromazine
(Thorazine)] may ‘ , leading
to more side effects and
greater potency; abnormal
heart rhythms have been
observed with thioridazine
(Mellaril), clozapine
(Clozaril), and pimozide
(Orap)

minor tranquilizers enhanced sedative effects

(neuroleptics)

Stimulants (Pep Pills) and Street Drugs

Drug Comment

amphetamines (‘‘speed’’ or These drugs may boost the

‘“crank’’) blood levels and effects of
cocaine some TCA [(e.g., imipramine
benzedrine (Tofranil), clomipramine
benzphetamine (Didrex) (Anafranil), desipramine
dextroamphetamine (Norpramin)] and vice versa;

(Dexedrine) abnormal heart rhythms and

increased blood pressure have
been observed with cocaine,
but seem possible when any
stimulants are combined with
TCA

methamphetamine (Desoxyn)
methylphenidate (Ritalin)

Weight-Loss and Appetite-Suppression Medications

Drug Comment
fenfluramine (Pondimin) Possible serotonin syndrome
when combined with
clomipramine; increased TCA
levels

546 David D. Burns, M.D.

Other Medications

Drug
antihistamines

acetazolamide (Diamox)

birth control pills and other
medications containing
estrogen

caffeine (in coffee, tea, soda,
chocolate)
charcoal tablets

cholestyramine (Questran)
cimetidine (Tagamet)

disulfiram (Antabuse)

ephedrine (can be found in
Bronkaid, Marax, Primatene,
Quadrinal, Vicks Vatronol
nose drops, and several other
asthma and cold medications)
high fiber diet

liothyronine (T3, Cytomel)

Comment
increased drowsiness; it is safer
to use antihistamines that are

not sedative

TCA blood levels may 7¢ ;
blood pressure may fall

TCA blood levels may f, with
greater Side effects; higher
doses of estrogen may reduce
the effects of TCA

TCA blood levels may fT

TCA blood levels may | due
to poor absorption from
the stomach and intestinal
tract

TCA blood levels may |

TCA blood levels may f
(greater side effects)

TCA blood levels may f
(greater side effects); in two
reported cases, disulfiram
plus amitriptyline (Elavil)
caused a severe brain reaction
(organic brain syndrome)
with mental confusion and
disorientation

TCA may block the 7 in BP
ordinarily caused by
ephedrine; ephedrine levels
and effects may |

TCA blood levels may | due
to poor absorption from
the stomach and intestinal
tract

can enhance the effects of TCA;
abnormal heart rhythms can
result; TCA blood levels

may 7

FEELING GOOD 547

Drug Comment
prochlorperazine (Compazine) TCA blood levels may f with
increased side effects and
toxic effects
psyllium (Metamucil) TCA blood levels may | due
to poor absorption from the
stomach and intestinal tract

scopolamine (Transderm) may cause f in TCA blood
levels
L-dopa (Sinemet) absorption of TCA from the

stomach and intestinal tract
into the blood may |;
effects of both TCA and
L-dopa may |
theophylline (Bronkaid) TCA blood levels may 7
tobacco (smoking) TCA blood levels may |

“Information in this table was obtained from several sources including the
Manual of Clinical Psychopharmacology'’ and Psychotropic Drugs Fast
Facts.'’ These excellent references are highly recommended.

"This is a dangerous and potentially fatal syndrome which includes rapid
changes in vital signs (fever, oscillations in blood pressure), sweating, nausea,
vomiting, rigid muscles, myoclonus, agitation, delirium, seizures, and coma.

Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs)

Currently, the most popular antidepressant drugs are the
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs. At this
time, five SSRIs are prescribed in the United States. These
include citalopram (Celexa), the newest SSRI which was
released in the U.S. in 1998, fluoxetine (Prozac), the first
SSRI which was released in 1988, and fluvoxamine (Lu-
vox), paroxetine (Paxil), and sertraline (Zoloft). The effects
of these SSRIs on the brain are much more specific and
selective than the older tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs dis-
cussed above. Instead of interacting with many different
systems in the brain, these drugs have selective effects on
nerves that use serotonin as a transmitter substance.

When it first appeared on the market, there was a great
deal of excitement about Prozac because it was chemically

548 David D. Burns, M.D.

quite different from the older antidepressants. Unlike the
tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs, it has specific effects on the
serotonergic nerves in the brain. Since a serotonin defi-
ciency was hypothesized to be the cause of depression, it
was hoped that Prozac would be dramatically more effec-
tive than the tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs which seemed
to affect so many different systems in the brain in a less
specific manner. It was also expected that Prozac (and the
other SSRIs) would have fewer side effects than the tri-
cyclic and tetracyclic drugs. This is because Prozac does
not have such strong effects on the histaminic, alpha-
adrenergic, and muscarinic receptors.

Only one of these two hopes was fulfilled. Prozac and
the other four SSRIs do cause significantly fewer side ef-
fects than the tricyclic and tetracyclic antidepressants and
are more pleasant to take. For example, they are less likely
to cause sleepiness, weight gain, dry mouth, dizziness, and
so on. They are also much safer since they are less likely
to have adverse effects on the heart, and they are much less
likely to result in death if a patient intentionally or unin-
tentionally takes an overdose. The biochemists who created
these new drugs deserve credit in this regard.

Unfortunately, the SSRIs are not more effective than the
older drugs. As many as 60 percent to 70 percent of de-
pressed patients will improve when treated with SSRIs, and
these percentages are no better than the older drugs. Among
chronically depressed patients, the probability of respond-
ing appears to be lower. The SSRIs also appear to be
slightly less effective than the older tricyclic antidepressants
for more severely depressed patients. In addition, the
amount of improvement is often only partial—the patient
may become less depressed, but may not return to full self-
esteem and joyous daily living. This is a problem for all
the antidepressants, and not just the SSRIs. Although they
are no more effective, the SSRIs are dramatically more ex-
pensive than the older drugs. In addition, the SSRIs have
some new and different side effects described below that
were not publicized when they were first released.

FEELING GOOD 549

Because of their favorable safety record and diminished
side effects, though, the SSRIs have truly captured the an-
tidepressant market. More money was spent on Prozac in
1995 ($2.5 billion) than was spent on all other antidepres-
sants in 1991 ($2.0 billion). One reason for the upsurge in
popularity is that primary care physicians now feel com-
fortable prescribing antidepressants because the SSRIs are
so safe. As a result, many depressed patients who would
not think of going to a psychiatrist or psychologist receive
SSRIs from their family physicians.

Because the SSRIs are used so widely and because they
have received so much media attention, many people be-
lieve they are incredibly powerful and almost magically ef-
fective. But this is simply not the case, as noted above. For
some depressed people, the SSRIs can be very effective.
For many others, they are only somewhat effective. And
often they do not seem to have any antidepressant effects
at all. It is the same story with all of our currently available
antidepressants—they are valuable tools to fight depression
but they are often not the entire answer and they are cer-
tainly not a panacea for what ails you.

The fact that the SSRIs are not more effective than the
older drugs has caused scientists to reconsider the validity
of the “‘serotonin’’ theory of depression which I described
in Chapter 17. You will recall that according to this theory,
a deficiency of serotonin in the brain causes depression, and
an increase in serotonin should reverse it. If this theory
were valid, the SSRIs should cause depressed patients to
become undepressed almost immediately—but Prozac can
take as many as five to eight weeks to become effective.
Regardless of what causes depression or why antidepres-
sants work, the SSRIs have been helpful to many depressed
individuals.

Doses of SSRIs. The doses of the five SSRIs are listed
in Table 20-1 on page 520. Unlike the older antidepres-
sants, which are often prescribed in doses that are too low,
the SSRIs are often prescribed in doses that are unneces-
sarily high. Because they have so few side effects, doctors

550 David D. Burns, M.D.

feel comfortable prescribing high doses and may prescribe
more than is really needed. For example, although 20 mg
to 80 mg per day was the dose range initially recommended
for Prozac, a single dose of 10 mg per day will be sufficient
for many patients. Once they are feeling better, many pa-
tients need only 5 mg per day, or even less. These smaller
doses are much less expensive and will produce fewer side
effects.

These low doses are effective because Prozac stays in
the body for a much longer period of time than most other
drugs—as long as several weeks. When you take Prozac,
your blood level continues to increase each day because the
Prozac leaves your body so slowly. After a while your
blood level becomes quite high. This is why you may need
only a tiny dose if you have been taking Prozac for several
weeks or more.

To understand this better, let’s go back to the bathtub
analogy I introduced in Chapter 19 to explain drug inter-
actions. Let’s imagine that the Prozac you are taking is like
the water going into the bathtub, but the hole in the bottom
of the tub is tiny. Over time, the water level increases,
because more water goes into the tub than goes out. The
water level can be compared to the level of the Prozac in
your blood. After four to five weeks, the water level finally
gets up to the correct therapeutic range. Now you can turn
the faucet down quite a bit so that the level in the tub does
not continue to increase and overflow. This would be anal-
ogous to reducing the dose of Prozac after you have been
on it for several weeks. Paradoxically, you are now taking
much smaller doses than when you first started taking the
Prozac, but your blood level is far higher.

Technically, we say that ‘‘steady state’’ has been
reached. Steady state means that the blood level remains
more or less constant, because the amount you take each
day is similar to the amount that your body eliminates each
day. The other four SSRIs do not have this property, be-
cause they leave the body much faster than Prozac. You
generally cannot reduce the doses after several weeks.

The effectiveness of very low doses of Prozac is now

FEELING GOOD 551

well known among the psychiatric profession, but I first
learned this from my patients soon after Prozac was re-
leased onto the market. Many patients reported that after
they had been on Prozac for a month or two, they seemed
to need only tiny doses, often as little as one tenth of a pill
per day, and sometimes even less. At first I thought these
patients had overly lively imaginations, buf soon many pa-
tients were reporting the same thing. I advised them to take
one Prozac pill, grind it up, and dissolve it in water or apple
juice to store in the refrigerator. Then they adjusted their
dose of Prozac by drinking a certain amount of the fluid
each day. So, for example, if you have dissolved one 20
mg pill in some apple juice and you drink one tenth of the
juice each day, this would correspond to a dose of 2 mg
per day. But if you try this, make sure you label the juice
clearly so that no one drinks your Prozac for breakfast!
Also, make sure you talk it over with your doctor and that
she or he approves of what you are doing.

It is also important for you to know that after you stop
taking Prozac, it will stay in your body for a long time
because it leaves your body so slowly. This would be like
a bathtub that takes an extraordinarily long time to empty
out after you pull the plug because the drain is plugged up.
After you are no longer taking the Prozac, significant levels
will remain in your blood for as many as five weeks or
more before the drug is entirely cleared out of your system.
Many medications can be dangerous to mix with Prozac.
You must not take these specific medications until you have
been off the Prozac entirely for at least five weeks. For
example, tranylcypromine (Parnate) is an antidepressant
known as an MAO inhibitor that will be discussed below.
Tranylcypromine (as well as other MAO inhibitors) can
cause dangerous and potentially fatal reactions if mixed
with Prozac. After you stop taking Prozac, a delay of at
least five to eight weeks will be necessary before you can
safely start taking tranylcypromine.

The other SSRIs, such as citalopram (Celexa), fluvox-
amine (Luvox), sertraline (Zoloft) and paroxetine (Paxil),
leave the body more rapidly than Prozac but they are still

552 David D. Burns, M.D.

metabolized rather slowly. For example, if you stop taking
one of these drugs, it will take your body approximately
one day to get rid of one half of the amount in your body.
It will take approximately four to seven days for most or
all of the drug to leave your body. This is much faster than
Prozac. Therefore, these other SSRIs drugs do not build up
to such high levels in your blood after you have been taking
them for more than a few weeks. Because they go in and
out of your blood more rapidly, they are usually taken sev-
eral times per day, whereas Prozac can be taken once a
day.

Age can also influence your dose requirements if you are
taking an SSRI. For example, levels of citalopram (Celexa),
fluoxetine (Prozac), and paroxetine (Paxil) are approxi-
mately twice as high in older individuals (over 65 years of
age) than in younger individuals. If you are taking one of
these drugs and you are over 65, you will need a lower
dose. Blood levels of sertraline (Zoloft) are also higher in
older individuals, although the differences are not as pro-
nounced. In contrast, fluvoxamine (Luvox) blood levels do
not seem to be affected by age.

Sometimes gender can play a role as well. For example,
the blood levels of fluoxetine (Prozac) are 40 percent to 50
percent lower in males than in females. Similarly, young
men develop blood levels of sertraline (Zoloft) that are 30
percent to 40 percent lower, on the average, than young
women. Men may need relatively higher doses of these
drugs, whereas women may need relatively lower doses.

Health problems can also influence your dose require-
ments. Individuals with liver, kidney, or heart disease may
not get rid of SSRIs as rapidly, and so smaller doses may
be needed. Make sure you ask your doctor about this if you
are being treated for a liver, kidney or heart ailment.

Side Effects of SSRIs. The most frequent side effects of
the five SSRIs are listed in Table 20-5 on pages 553-~554.
As noted above, the side effects of the SSRIs are milder
than the older drugs, and this is the reason for their enor-

FEELING GOOD 553
Table 20-5. Side Effects of SSRI Antidepressants

Note: This table was adapted with permission from Preskorn®’ and from
the prescribing information for citalopram. Only the more common side
effects of each drug are listed. The numbers in the table represent the
percent of patients receiving the drug who reported each side effect minus
the percent of patients on placebo who reported the same side effect. For
example, if 20% of patients on Prozac reported nervousness as a side
effect, while 10% of patients on placebo reported this same side effect,
the number 10% would appear in this chart. This would be an estimate
of the “‘true’’ nervousness actually caused by Prozac. For each side effect,
the drug or drugs with the highest percentages are indicated in boldface.

fluoxe- | fluvoxam-} paroxe- } sertra- | citalo-
tine ine tine line pram
(Prozac) | (Luvex) | (Paxil) | (Zoloft) | (Celexa)

# of patients on
drug

# of patients on

placebo

1063

General Symptoms

headache —_A
dizziness —
nervousness 1%
tiredness 8%
difficulty sleeping 1%
weak or fatigued

muscles —
tremor 2%

Mouth, Stomach, and Intestinal Tract

dry mouth 6%
loss of appetite 2%
nausea or upset

stomach 71%
diarrhea 3%

constipation

554 David D. Burns, M.D.

sertra- citalo-
line pram

(Zoloft) | (Celexa)

fluvoxa-
mine
(Luvox)

fluoxe-
tine
(Prozac)

paroxe-
tine
(Paxil)

Other
excessive
sweating 5% 0% 9% 6% 2%
Sexual

loss of interest in | Specific comparative data on the sexual side effects
sex of the SSRIs were not available. However, it ap-

delayed or no pears that 30% to 40% of patients receiving SSRIs
orgasm do experience some sexual side effects.°

“A dash means that the incidence of this side effect was not greater than placebo.
"During the initial drug testing studies patients were not explicitly asked about sexual
side effects. Consequently, the estimates of sexual side effects in the PDR are too
low.

mous popularity. They are less likely than the tricyclic anti-
depressants to cause dry mouth, constipation, or dizziness.
They do not stimulate the appetite when you first start tak-
ing them; if anything, some patients taking SSRIs lose
weight in the beginning. Unfortunately, when the SSRIs are
taken for a prolonged period of time, their side effects
sometimes increase. For example, some patients taking
these agents report increases in appetite and weight gain
after a while, even though they lost weight at first.

Some of the most common and troublesome side effects of
the SSRIs include nausea, diarrhea, cramping, heartburn, and
other signs of stomach upset. Approximately 20 percent to 30
percent of patients reported these symptoms in the earliest
studies with the SSRIs.'® You will see in Table 20—5 that flu-
voxamine (Luvox) is the most likely to cause constipation,
whereas sertraline (Zoloft) is more likely to cause diarrhea.
Patients taking paroxetine (Paxil) and sertraline (Zoloft) are
more likely to complain of a dry mouth because of the anti-
cholinergic effects of these drugs. In some studies, as many as
20 percent of the patients taking paroxetine (Paxil) reported
dry mouth. (However, the percentages in the table are much
lower because the placebo effects have been subtracted out.)

FEELING GOOD 555

Most of these effects on the stomach and intestinal tract
tend to occur in the first week or two and then disappear
as the body adjusts to the medicine. In addition, if you start
the SSRI at a low dose and then increase the dose gradually,
these side effects are less likely to occur. It can also help
if you take the medication with meals. (The tricyclic and
tetracyclic drugs discussed in the previous section can also
be taken with meals to minimize any adverse effects on the
stomach and gastrointestinal tract.)

The SSRI drugs can occasionally cause headaches when
you first start to take them. In Table 20-5 the rates for
headache seem to be the highest for fluoxetine (Prozac) and
fluvoxamine (Luvox); in contrast, the rates for citalopram
(Celexa), paroxetine (Paxil), and sertraline (Zoloft) appear
to be no greater than the rates of headaches reported by
patients who take placebos. Excessive sweating has also
been reported, especially with paroxetine (Paxil), but this
is not usually severe. Patients taking high doses of the
SSRIs may also complain of tremor, and this side effect
seems to be equally common among all of the SSRI drugs.

Although initially reported as a ‘‘rare’’ side effect, it is
now clear that delayed time to orgasm is quite common for
men and women taking SSRIs. Some patients also complain
of a loss of interest in sex or an inability to achieve an
erection. These side effects were reported in fewer than 5
percent of patients during the premarketing research trials.
However, now that the drugs are widely used, it has be-
come Clear that these side effects are far more common than
reported in clinical trials and can occur in 30 percent or
more of patients. The sexual side effects may be a reason-
able trade-off if the drug helps you overcome your depres-
sion. Keep in mind that a loss of interest in sex can also
be a symptom of depression itself. In addition, you will
probably not need to stay on the drug indefinitely. Once
you are feeling better and you stop taking the SSRI, your
sexual functioning should return to normal.

You might wonder why these side effects were not noted
in the premarketing research studies. At the 1998 Stanford

556 David D. Burns, M.D.

Psychopharmacology Conference, one of the speakers jok-
ingly mentioned that the drug companies seem to have a
‘‘don’t ask, don’t tell’’ policy about certain kinds of ad-
verse effects, including sexual side effects. I guess the idea
is that what you don’t know won’t hurt you. I think this
policy is unfortunate, because the FDA (and potential con-
sumers) may be given an overly rosy picture about the ef-
fectiveness, side effect profile, and safety of a new drug.
After the drug has been in widespread use for several years,
a different picture often emerges.

The effects on sex are so predictable that one of these
drugs, paroxetine (Paxil) is now recognized as an effective
treatment for men who experience premature ejaculation
(having orgasms too rapidly during sex). Some people do
not experience a delayed orgasm on SSRIs. Others expe-
rience it but are not bothered, and some actually view it as
a benefit. What is important 1s that if this feels like a prob-
lem for you, you should discuss it with your doctor before
discontinuing the medication on your own. It might be pos-
sible to reduce the dose without a loss of the antidepressant
effects.

Several drugs can be combined with an SSRI in an at-
tempt to combat the sexual difficulties. Four which show
promise include bupropion (Wellbutrin, in doses of up to
225 mg to 300 mg per day), buspirone (BuSpar; 15 to 30
mg per day), yohimbine (5 mg three times daily), or aman-
tadine (100 mg three times daily).

Citalopram (Celexa), one of the newest SSRIs on the
American market, may have fewer sexual side effects than
the other SSRIs. You can see in Table 20—5 that it does
appear to have fewer side effects in general than the other
four SSRIs. In addition, there is the hope that it will be
more effective for sévere depressions than the SSRIs. It will
be interesting to see if citalopram (Celexa) is more effective
and does actually have fewer side effects after the drug has
been in widespread use for a period of time. Sometimes
marketing claims when drugs are first released turn out not

FEELING GOOD 557

to be supported by clinical experience or by subsequent
research by independent investigators.

Among the SSRIs, fluoxetine (Prozac) appears to be the
most activating (stimulating), although fluvoxamine (Lu-
vox) seems almost as likely to cause this side effect. Be-
cause fluoxetine (Prozac) is stimulating, it is sometimes
given in the morning and at noon, rather than at bedtime.
The stimulation can often be a benefit to depressed patients
who feel tired, sluggish, and unmotivated. On the other
hand, fluoxetine (Prozac) and fluvoxamine (Luvox) can also
Cause anxiety or jitteriness in as many as 10 percent to 20
percent of patients. These side effects can sometimes create
additional difficulties for depressed patients who already
have these kinds of symptoms.

The stimulating effects of fluoxetine (Prozac) are not
necessarily bad, even for anxious patients. Anxiety and de-
pression nearly always go hand in hand to a certain extent,
and many patients need treatment for both kinds of prob-
lems. Patients with significant anxiety, such as chronic wor-
rying, panic attacks, or agoraphobia, are often the ones who
complain that fluoxetine (Prozac) makes them feel more
nervous initially. I often tell these patients that the nerv-
ousness they feel is a good thing, because it shows the drug
is working in the brain. I encourage them to stick with it,
because in a few weeks or less they may notice a significant
improvement in their depression as well as their anxiety.
Most anxious patients have been able to stick with the
fluoxetine (Prozac), and the predicted improvement often
does occur. This illustrates how a positive attitude can
sometimes help patients overcome drug side effects.

Although any of the SSRIs can cause trouble with sleep-
ing, not all of them are as stimulating as fluoxetine (Pro-
zac). In fact, paroxetine (Paxil) and fluvoxamine (Luvox)
can be quite sedating for some patients. In other words,
these drugs will tend to relax or tire you, instead of stim-
ulating you the way fluoxetine (Prozac) does. In fact, pa-

558 David D. Burns, M.D.

roxetine (Paxil) is sometimes given two hours before
bedtime so that the maximum sleepiness will occur at the
time that you ordinarily go to sleep. Paroxetine (Paxil) or
fluvoxamine (Luvox) might be good choices if insomnia is
a major aspect of your depression. Note, however, that pa-
tients taking paroxetine (Paxil) are also somewhat more
likely to complain of weak or fatigued muscles. Citalopram
(Celexa) and sertraline (Zoloft) appear to be halfway in-
between—they do not typically cause excessive stimulation
or sedation, but are more neutral in this respect.

In the section below on serotonin antagonists, I will de-
scribe an antidepressant called trazodone (trade name De-
syrel) which has calming, sedative properties. Trazodone
can be given in small doses (50 to 100 mg at bedtime) to
patients who are taking SSRIs. This has three potential ben-
efits: (1) the calming effects of trazodone will reduce the
nervousness caused by the SSRIs; (2) the trazodone can be
given at bedtime to improve sleep; (3) trazodone may
sometimes boost the antidepressant effects of the SSRI and
increase the likelihood of recovery.

In spite of these advantages, I usually try to treat patients
with one drug at a time. This avoids any extra side effects
and minimizes the possibility of adverse drug interactions.
In my experience, treatment with one drug at a time is
usually successful. If you reduce the dose of any SSRI, you
can often minimize the side effects without having to add
additional drugs. I will address the problem of using more
than one drug at the same time toward the end of this chap-
ter.

For example, if you are starting fluoxetine (Prozac) and
you are bothered by nervousness, insomnia, or upset stom-
ach, you can take a lower dose and increase the dose more
gradually. In addition, if you have been on fluoxetine (Pro-
zac) for several weeks or more, there is an excellent chance
you can reduce the dose, often quite dramatically. This will
often minimize the side effects without interfering with the
antidepressant effects of this drug. As noted above, this is
because levels of fluoxetine (Prozac) build up after a period

FEELING GOOD 559

of time, so the same dose may produce far more side effects
because your blood level has become so much higher.
There is really no need for large doses or excessively high
blood levels of any of the SSRIs, because low doses have
been shown to be just as effective as high doses.

SSRI Drug Interactions. A number of common drug in-
teractions for the SSRIs are listed in Table 20-6 on pages
560-563. You will see in Table 20-6 that many other psy-
chiatric drugs can interact with the SSRIs, including anti-
depressants, major and minor tranquilizers, and mood
stabilizers. Important interactions with nonpsychiatric drugs
are also listed. If you are taking an SSRI and one or more
additional drugs at the same time, it would be wise to re-
view this table. Make sure you also ask your physician and
pharmacist if there are any drug interactions you should be
aware of. This includes prescription drugs as well as non-
prescription drugs that are sold over the counter.

As you can see, SSRIs have a tendency to cause the
blood levels of other antidepressants to increase. This is be-
cause the SSRIs slow down the metabolism of these other
drugs in the liver, as discussed in Chapter 19. In some cases,
this could be dangerous. For example, the combination of an
SSRI with a tricyclic antidepressant can potentially cause ab-
normal heart rhythms. Although this complication is rare, the
effects on the heart can be serious. The combination of an
SSRI with bupropion (Wellbutrin) can increase the risk of
seizures—an uncommon but serious side effect of bupro-
pion. However, as noted above, bupropion is often added to
an SSRI in low doses to try to minimize the sexual side ef-
fects of the SSRIs. This can usually be done safely. Make
sure you inform your physician if you have any history of
head trauma or seizures, because this particular drug combi-
nation may not be advisable for you.

As mentioned in Chapter 19, the interaction of an SSRI
with an MAOI antidepressant is extremely dangerous re-
gardless of the dose of either drug. This combination should
be avoided because it can result in the potentially lethal
‘‘serotonin syndrome’”’ described in Chapter 19. In addi-

560 David D. Burns, M.D.

Table 20-6. Drug Interaction Guide for

SSRI Antidepressants.?

Antidepressants

Drug
tricyclic and tetracyclic
antidepressants

SSRI antidepressants

monoamine oxidase inhibitors
(MAOIs)

serotonin antagonists
{trazodone (Desyrel) and
nefazodone (Serzone) }

bupropion (Wellbutrin)

venlafaxine (Effexor)

mirtazapine (Remeron)

Comment
SSRIs can cause TCA levels to
? ; abnormal heart rhythms
can result
not usually combined; 7 in
SSRI blood levels can result
serotonin syndrome”

blood levels of nefazodone or
trazodone and their
metabolite (mCPP) may
+ and cause anxiety

? risk of seizures; caution
required

may cause ¢ in levels of
venlafaxine

no information available as yet

Antihistamines

Drug
terfenadine (Seldane) and
astemizole (Hismanal)

cyproheptadine (Periactin)

Comment
fluvoxamine (Luvox) may f
levels of terfenadine and
astemizole; fatal heart
rhythms can occur
may reverse the effects of
SSRIs

Diabetes Medications

Drug
tolbutamide (Orinase)

insulin

Comment

fluvoxamine (Luvox) may 7
levels of tolbutamide; low
blood sugar may result

fluvoxamine (Luvox) may cause
{ in blood sugar; insulin
levels may need to be
adjusted

FEELING GOOD 561

Heart and Blood Pressure Medications

Comment

T in blood levels of digitoxin
and potential toxic effects
including mental confusion

levels of beta-blockers including
metoprolol (Lopressor) and
propranolol (Inderal) also
used for angina may f,
leading to excessive heart
slowing and ECG
abnormalities; calcium
channel blockers including
nifedipine (Procardia) and
verapamil (Calan) may also
+ , leading to more potent
effects on blood pressure

SSRI may ¢ risk of abnormal
heart rhythms when
combined with drugs to
control heart rhythms, such
as flecainide (Tambocor),
encainide, mexiletine
(Mexitil), and propafenone
(Rythmol)

Drug
digoxin (Lanoxin) and
digitoxin (Crystodigin)

medications for high blood
pressure

medications for abnormal
heart rhythms

Other Psychiatric Drugs

Drug Comment
benzodiazepines (minor levels of benzodiazepines may
tranquilizers) including * ; excessive drowsiness or
alprazolam (Xanax), confusion; lower doses of
diazepam (Valium) and benzodiazepines may be
others needed, fluvoxamine (Luvox)

has strongest effect, but
problems have also been
reported with fluoxetine
(Prozac); clonazepam
(Klonopin) and temazepam
(Restoril) may be safer than
alprazolam (Xanax) and
diazepam (Valium)

562 David D. Burns, M.D.

Other Psychiatric Drugs cont.

Drug
buspirone (BuSpar)

lithium

L-tryptophan

major tranquilizers
(neuroleptics) such as
haloperidol (Haldol),
perphenazine (Trilafon) and
thioridazine (Mellaril)

methadone (Dolophine)

mood stabilizers and
anticonvulsants

Comment

may enhance the effects of
SSRIs; however, fluoxetine
(Prozac) may reduce _ the
effectiveness of BuSpar, some
patients with obsessive
compulsive disorder who
received this combination
experienced a worsening of
symptoms

* or J levels may result; may
lead to lithium toxicity at
normal lithium levels

can cause agitation, restlessness,
and upset stomach as well as
the serotonin syndrome

blood levels of major tranquilizer
may f leading to increased
side effects; fluvoxamine
(Luvox) may be the safest
SSRI to combine’ with
neuroleptics; risperidone
(Risperdal) and clozapine
(Clozaril) may block the
antidepressant effects of the
SSRIs

fluvoxamine (Luvox) leads to 7
in blood levels

SSRIs, especially fluvoxamine
(Luvox) and fluoxetine
(Prozac), can cause 7 in
levels of | carbamazepine
(Tegretol) and phenytoin
(Dilantin). The combination of
either SSRI with phenytoin

can cause phenytoin toxicity

Other Medications

Drug | Comment
alcohol increased drowsiness

Drug

caffeine (in coffee, tea, soda,

chocolate)

cisapride (Propulsid)

cyclosporine
Neoral) (an
immunosuppressive drug used
in organ transplants)

dextromethorphan (a cough
suppressant in many over-the-
counter medications)

tacrine (Cognex)

tobacco (smoking)

theophylline (Bronkaid)

warfarin (Coumadin) (a blood-
thinner)

(Sandimmune;

FEELING GOOD 563

Comment
fluvoxamine (Luvox) causes
levels to 1; excess

nervousness may result
fluvoxamine (Luvox) may 7
levels of cisapride; fatal heart
rhythms can occur
levels of cyclosporine may 7

hallucinations reported with
fluoxetine (Prozac), possible
with any SSRI

fluvoxamine (Luvox) leads to ¢
in blood levels

levels of fluvoxamine (Luvox)
may |

fluvoxamine (Luvox) leads to 7
in blood levels and can
produce toxic effects,
including excess nervousness

fluvoxamine (Luvox) may f
levels of warfarin (Coumadin);
increased bleeding may result.
The increased bleeding can also
result without any changes in
the prothrombin test (this
bleeding test is used to monitor
the dose of warfarin). This is
because the SSRIs can also
impair clotting through their
effects on blood platelets,

whereas warfarin affects the

clotting proteins

“Information in this table was obtained from several sources including the
Manual of Clinical Psychopharmacology' and Psychotropic Drugs Fast
Facts.'’ These excellent references are highly recommended.

“This is a dangerous and potentially fatal syndrome which includes rapid
changes in vital signs (fever, oscillations in blood pressure), sweating, nausea,
vomiting, rigid muscles, myoclonus, agitation, delirium, seizures, and coma.

564 David D. Burns, M.D.

tion, remember that both the SSRIs and the MAOIs can re-
quire a considerable period of time to clear out of your body
after you have stopped taking them. If you stopped taking
Prozac and then started an MAOT several weeks later, it
could trigger the serotonin syndrome because Prozac would
still be present in your bloodstream. Similarly, if you were to
start Prozac within two weeks of stopping an MAOI, this
might also trigger the serotonin syndrome. The effects of the
MAOIs last only one to two weeks, so you will not have
to wait as long when you switch from an MAOI to an SSRI
as when you switch in the opposite direction.

A number of other important interactions which are listed
in the table involve common drugs that many people might
take for a cold or flu, diabetes, high blood pressure, aller-
gies, and so on. For example, dextromethorphan is a cough
suppressant in many over-the-counter cold preparations.
When combined with an SSRI, dextromethorphan can
cause visual hallucinations. This has been reported with
fluoxetine (Prozac) but could theoretically occur with any
SSRI. You will also see that two common antihistamines,
terfenadine (Seldane) and astemizole (Hismanal), can pro-
duce abnormal and potentially fatal heart rhythm abnor-
malities when combined with certain SSRIs, and a third
antihistamine called cyproheptadine (Periactin) can block
the antidepressant effects of an SSRI.

Make sure you review this table if you are taking an
SSRI. If you have any questions, discuss them with your
doctor and pharmacist. The SSRIs are safe for the over-
whelming majority of individuals who take them. With a
little good teamwork between you and your doctor, your
experience with an SSRI can be positive.

MAO Inhibitors

The Table of Antidepressants on pages 514-515 lists four
drugs known as monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs).
They include isocarboxazid (Marplan), phenelzine (Nardil),

FEELING GOOD 565

selegiline (Eldepryl), and tranylcypromine (Parnate). You
may recall from Chapter 17 that the MAOIs fell into rela-
tive disuse when the newer and safer compounds were de-
veloped. They are probably vastly underutilized because
they can be quite dangerous if mixed with a number of
common foods (such as cheese) and medicines (including
many common over-the-counter cold, cough, and hay fever
drugs) and because they require fairly sophisticated medical
skills on the part of the prescribing doctor.

In recent years the MAOIs have experienced a much-
deserved resurgence of popularity because they are often
remarkably effective for patients who do not respond to
other kinds of antidepressants. Many of these patients have
experienced so many years of chronic depression that their
illness has become an unwelcome lifestyle. The beneficial
effects of the MAOIs can sometimes be quite impressive.

The MAOIs can also be particularly effective in an
‘atypical depression’’ that is characterized by the following
types of symptoms:

* overeating (as opposed to a loss of appetite in classic
depression);

¢ fatigue and sleeping too much (rather than trouble with
sleeping);

¢ irritability or hostility (in addition to the depression);

¢ extreme sensitivity to rejection.

Patients with this form of depression sometimes also em-
phasize chronic feelings of fatigue as well as a “‘leaden
paralysis.’’ It is not clear whether this really represents a
subtype of depression or simply a particular group of symp-
toms that any depressed individual might experience.
Nevertheless, studies conducted at Columbia University
suggest that the MAOIs may actually be better than the
cyclic antidepressants for patients with these kinds of symp-
toms. The MAOIs can also be remarkably effective when
high levels of anxiety accompany the depression, including
phobias (such as social phobia), panic attacks, or hypo-

566 David D. Burns, M.D.

chondriacal complaints. Patients with recurrent obsessive
thoughts and compulsive, ritualistic, nonsensical habits
(such as recurrent hand-washing or repetitive checking of
door locks) may also experience relief when treated with
MAOIs.

The MAOIs can also be helpful when chronic anger or
impulsive self-destructive behavior accompanies the de-
pression. Patients with these features are sometimes diag-
nosed as having ‘‘borderline personality disorder.’’
Although these individuals can sometimes be quite difficult
to treat, I have seen many who were dramatically helped
by the MAOIs. Of course, all patients who take MAOIs
must agree to follow the dietary restrictions and medication
guidelines religiously. If a patient is unreliable or will not
agree to this, other types of medications should be used
instead.

The mechanism of action of the MAOIs is different from
that of the other antidepressant drugs. You learned in Chap-
ter 17 that most antidepressants act by blocking the pumps
for neurotransmitters at the nerve endings. As a result, the
levels of the chemical transmitters such as serotonin, nor-
epinephrine, or dopamine build up in the synaptic regions.
In contrast, the MAOIs seem to work by preventing the
breakdown of chemical messengers within the nerves. As
a result, levels of serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine
build up inside the nerve terminals and these messengers
are released into the synapses in much higher concentra-
tions when the nerves fire. This results in a greater stimu-
lation of the nerves at the other side of the synaptic
junctions.

The MAOIs require careful medical management and
close teamwork with your doctor. They are well worth the
effort because they can sometimes lead to profound mood
transformations, even when other drugs have been ineffec-
tive. Because they may cause increases in blood pressure,
they are not usually recommended for individuals over
sixty years of age or individuals with heart problems. In

FEELING GOOD 567

addition, they are not usually prescribed for individuals
with significant cerebrovascular disorders, such as strokes
or aneurysms, or individuals with brain tumors. Paradoxi-
cally, though, they can sometimes be used with individuals
with high blood pressure because they usually cause the
blood pressure to fall.‘? Consultation with a cardiologist
would be necessary to make sure there are no dangerous
interactions with your other blood pressure medications.

Like other antidepressants, the MAOIs usually require at
least two or three weeks to become effective. Your doctor
will probably want to obtain a medical evaluation before
starting you on this type of drug. This evaluation may in-
clude a physical examination, a chest X ray, an electrocar-
diogram, a blood count, blood chemistry tests, and a
urinalysis.

Doses of MAOIs. The doses of the MAOIs are listed in
Table 20-1 on page 520. The two most commonly pre-
scribed drugs for depression and anxiety are tranylcyprom-
ine (Parnate) and phenelzine (Nardil). One of the MAOIs,
isocarboxazid (Marplan), is no longer available in the
United States but is available in some other countries in-
cluding Canada. In addition, selegiline (Eldepryl) is rarely
used for depression but is often used in small doses (5 mg
to 10 mg per day) in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease.
It is just starting to be used for depression and some other
psychiatric disorders, although in higher doses than for Par-
kinson’s disease, as indicated in Table 20-1. Although the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has not yet approved
selegiline for use in psychiatric disorders, recent studies
indicate that it can also be effective for patients with atyp-
ical depression as well as those with chronic, severe de-
pression.

A common prescribing error with the MAOIs is to give
too big a dose too soon. For example, you will see in Table
20-1 on page 520 that the usual dose range for tranylcy-
promine (Parnate) is 10 mg to 50 mg per day. Some doctors
prescribe larger doses, but I have seen many patients re-

568 David D. Burns, M.D.

spond to just one or two pills per day. Because the MAOIs
can have some toxic side effects, I think it is prudent to
start them at low doses, to increase very slowly, and not to
push the dose too high. I usually start the patient on just
one pill per day of an MAOIT for the first week, and then
increase to two pills per day. If the patient does not respond
to a reasonable dose, say three or four pills per day of
tranylcypromine or phenelzine, I usually do not increase the
dose further but instead try an alternative medication along
with a different psychotherapeutic strategy.

How long should you stay on an MAOI if it does not
seem to be working? It seems obvious to me that if you
have not had a fairly dramatic response after three or four
weeks, as confirmed by your weekly scores on the mood
test in Chapter 2, then you have probably given the drug a
fair trial. You might respond better to another type of drug
or to the cognitive therapy techniques described in this
book.

How long should you stay on an MAOI if you do re-
spond favorably? As with any antidepressant, you will have
to discuss this with your physician, and many different ap-
proaches are currently in vogue. Some physicians believe
that patients need antidepressants indefinitely to correct a
‘‘chemical imbalance,’’ but I have not usually found it nec-
essary to keep patients on MAOIs or other antidepressants
indefinitely. I have found that patients nearly always do
well when they discontinue their MAOIs after a reasonable
period of feeling good. Sometimes this may be as short as
three months, sometimes as long as six to twelve months.

As with most antidepressants, you should taper off an
MAOI gradually so there will be no withdrawal effects.
Tapering too rapidly has caused some patients to experience
sudden manic reactions. Suddenly going off selegiline can
cause nausea, dizziness, and hallucinations, so one has to
be especially careful to taper slowly.

What if you go off the MAOI and then get depressed
again in the future? If you have responded to an MAOIT in
the past, you may respond more rapidly if you take the

FEELING GOOD 569

same MAOI again in the future. In my practice I have had
many patients who experienced a positive response to an
MAOI (usually Parnate) and continued to feel undepressed
for many years after they stopped taking the drug. Even-
tually, a few of them became depressed again and called
for a “‘tune-up’’ appointment. I always gave them the first
available appointments. If they sounded quite depressed, I
told them to start the medication again. I also told them to
start doing their psychotherapy homework again, especially
the exercise of writing down and challenging their negative
thoughts. When I saw them a few days later, many of them
were already feeling better. Some of them told me that they
began to improve in as little as one day or less when they
took the MAOI for the second time. I believe that the med-
ication as well as the cognitive therapy contributed to the
rapid improvement.

I have not seen this rapid response with other types of
antidepressants and do not know why it sometimes happens
with MAOIs. Several patients explained that their bodies
seemed to ‘“‘recognize’’ the effects of the MAOI right away,
especially the pleasurable stimulation that tranylcypromine
(Parnate) causes. This helped them ‘‘remember’’ what it
was like not to feel depressed. In a few cases, the improve-
ment in mood came within an hour or two of the first pills
they took. In the majority of cases, one or two cognitive
therapy sessions seemed to reverse the relapse of depres-
sion.

Side Effects of MAOIs. The most frequent side effects
are listed in Table 20—7 on pages 572-573. As noted above,
tranylcypromine (Parnate) tends to be stimulating. The
stimulating effects of tranylcypromine (Parnate) can be es-
pecially helpful to depressed individuals who feel tired, le-
thargic, and unmotivated. Tranylcypromine (Parnate) may
provide them with some much-needed ‘‘go power.’’ Be-
cause tranylcypromine (Parnate) tends to be stimulating, it
can also cause insomnia. In order to minimize the insomnia,
the entire dose can be taken once a day in the morning or

570 David D. Burns, M.D.

in divided doses in the morning and at noon. The latest rec-
ommended time to take tranylcypromine (Parnate) is 6:00
P.M. Phenelzine (Nardil) is less stimulating than tranylcy-
promine (Parnate) and may be an attractive option for pa-
tients who feel too stimulated by tranylcypromine (Parnate).

The other side effects of the MAOIs are similar to those
of the tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs described previously,
but they are usually mild, especially when the MAOIs are
taken in low doses. As you can see in Table 20-7, the
MAOIs do not have strong effects on the muscarinic re-
ceptors (you will recall that these are also called cholinergic
receptors). Consequently, they are not likely to cause dry
mouth, blurred vision, constipation, or a delay in starting
the urine flow. Weight gain also does not seem to be so
much of a problem with these drugs, although some pa-
tients experience an increased appetite. Weight gain appears
to be less of a problem with tranylcypromine (Parnate) than
phenelzine (Nardil). Because tranylcypromine is stimulat-
ing, it may actually reduce your appetite, as do some of the
SSRIs including fluoxetine (Prozac).

Some patients experience light-headedness when stand-
ing suddenly because these drugs have relatively strong ef-
fects on the alpha-adrenergic receptors. If dizziness does
develop, the interventions described previously can help.
These include: (1) ask your doctor if you can lower the
dose—often you can still maintain the antidepressant effect;
(2) get up more slowly and exercise your legs by walking
in place immediately when you stand; (3) wear support
stockings; (4) drink adequate fluids and make sure you eat
enough foods with salt to maintain your body’s electrolytes.

Like most antidepressants, the MAOIs can sometimes
cause a rash, although I do not recall ever seeing this. A
loosening of the stool or constipation might also occur.
Some patients report an upset stomach. Taking the medi-
cation with meals can alleviate this. Some patients report
muscle twitches, but this is usually not dangerous. If you
experience muscle pains, cramps, or tingling fingers—side
effects I have never observed—a daily dose of 50 to 100

FEELING GOOD 571

mg of vitamin B, (pyridoxine) may help. This is because
MAOI drugs may interfere with pyridoxine metabolism, so
taking extra pyridoxine may compensate for this effect.
Some doctors recommend taking vitamin B, routinely if
you are on an MAOL.

The MAOIs can sometimes interfere with sexual func-
tioning, especially in higher doses. Some patients experi-
ence a decreased interest in sex and difficulties maintaining
an erection or achieving orgasm. In this regard, the MAOIs
are a lot like the SSRIs described previously. The sexual
side effects may result from their effects on the serotonin
receptors in the brain, but this is not known for sure. Al-
though the sexual side effects can be disconcerting, these
difficulties may be a worthwhile trade-off if the medication
is having a beneficial effect on your mood. You should be
reassured that the sexual side effects are dose-related and
usually disappear entirely when you are no longer taking
the MAOI.

One young man I treated actually found the sexual side
effects to be helpful. He reported that he had always had a
problem with premature ejaculation. Once he started taking
tranylcypromine (Parnate), the problem disappeared. In
fact, he reported he could make love for prolonged periods
without any danger at all of having a premature orgasm.
He said his girlfriend thought this was a great miracle, and
he advised me to buy stock in the company that manufac-
tured the drug!

One pleasurable side effect of an MAOT is an excessively
positive reaction to the drug. In other words, quite a number
of patients not only overcome their depressions but begin
to feel euphoric or high. This is not necessarily bad, but in
some cases may become so extreme that the patient expe-
riences the symptoms of mild mania. In the rare patient
with a history of bipolar manic-depressive illness (patients
with previous extreme highs and lows that were not caused
by drugs or alcohol), there is the possibility that an MAOI
might trigger a full-blown manic episode. This is actually
true of most antidepressants, and not just the MAOIs.

‘SUITJOMS foULIN BuIE\s sjqnon
‘enoydna ‘Alani ‘uise3io paXeyap
‘ules JYysIom ‘uoTednsuo0s ‘yoRulo}s
yosdn ‘yjnou Arp ‘Buryoqay
‘IOWI] ‘ssouyvom ‘suldaeys

J[qnoy ‘ansyey ‘osyoepeay ‘ssoulzzip + 030

WSP3IO PoXejop

‘YORuUIo}s yosdn ‘Bureams ‘ssouyeom

‘BUops ‘eIUWIOSUT ‘sud;qo.1d

AJOWOU SUOTSNJUuOd ‘Aral ‘1ouIEN

‘BIURU IO AJIATJOBIOAO ‘ayeI pue
WIUIAYI Wey Ul sosuBYd ‘ayoepeoy + 019

sA01dadad
(WP) 2tutavasnu

uoyuaay Cavuip

gsPaffq apis yAvay papaads ‘yinopw aq
JUDIYIUBIC 10 UOUULOD UOUDAYSUOTD “UOISIA Pasanig

+++

“bt

saojdazad (170)
INBAIUaApD-DY dD

SSaUuIzZzIq] puv
Ssaupapvay-1y sry

+ (TfpieN) suyzjausyd

(ueydazeyy)
+ pizexoqg.1es0si

SAOJAII9A
(CH) aumuvisiy 40]daI2ay UIDAG

UID) 14 s1aM
puv uolnpag Laff] apis

‘S}OOJJo OpIS snojosuep nq

OIVI SB [JOM SB ‘paysl] a1 syuoted JO DIOW! IO %O] JO %C Ul ANdI0 yey) S}OaTJo OpIs ‘feIouas Uy “aATSUaYaIdUIOD JOU SI IST] SIU], :9JON

eSJOUGIYU] BSEPIXO SUIWEOUOYY JO sOEYA epls *2-0% B1q2L

“SIOVW Jamo ayy 0} septs AraA Ayqeqoid axe auAIZapas Jo s}dajZo apts

auf ‘sasop Jaysiy yy “sfenprlArpul passaidap ur s}99jJ9 Opis asAvd pfnom suTIZafes ApUanbayy MOY OUTWLIOIOP 0} INOYJIP SI IM ‘aJOJaIay_], ‘SSoUT[T JOU
0} onp suiojdwiAs Auvwl savy osye pue ‘sdnp Joo Aueul aye) OYM WISTUOSUDeY YIM syuaned Joy poquosaid Ayyensn si Srp sty asnedaq SI ST],
"sasop [[ews ye ‘OANDayJo yb aq udyo

ued pue ‘s}ajJo apis May AJOA oavy Ayfensn Ady], ‘“asop ayy Suronpas Aq poyeuRUTe JO poonpar 3q Udo ED SIOWIN oY} JO SI9aJJo apis oy) Jo Aue,
"SSOUDANIAJJO SuUIONpal NOUPIM S}DaJJo apis sonpos Uso ued ssop sy ZuLONpay “st ssop ay] o8ze] MOY UO puodap OsTE [IM puE sjenprArpul Suowe
AXBA [[IM Ja]Jo apts ayy Jo Aytsuayar fenjoe ayy, ‘dopoasp [[IM 39jJo opts Jepnonsed v yey) POOYTayT oy) 0} Jajyor 9Iqu) Sty UT SZUNeI +44 0F + BY],

UOISIA poLNnig ‘yesy Sues
‘SUT]JOMS {Zul[suy Jo ssouquinu
‘WISBSIO poARjap ‘syoepeay
‘voyLleIp ‘uonednysuoo ‘ayjedde
JO sso] ‘yoeurojs yosdn ‘suiseds
SJOSNU ‘JOUIAI} SSuTyoIMy ‘ssouyeom
JO ssoupely ‘surdesjs sqnoy
‘AJOIXUB ‘SSoUSSOpSal ‘ssul[so] (aj}eu.leg)
oTUeU JO DWOYdns ‘uoNeNUISIOAO + 030 +44 + 010 surmoid Ad, Aue2}

$}D9JJO Opis Joyjo AIqissod

‘SSOUIZZIp ‘yynou Ap ‘uorsnjuos

‘uIses1o poAejep ‘ssoy 3ysIoM ‘vosneu
o(S]QUTBAB UOTJULIOJUT Poztwt]) + + 0 (jAadapiq) auyysayes

574 David D. Burns, M.D.

If you do start to feel unusually happy, it would be wise
to keep in touch with your prescribing doctor to make sure
these feelings do not get out of hand. In my experience,
this is not usually a serious problem—the euphoric feelings
provide a welcome relief from the depression and tend to
diminish in a week or so. The euphoric feelings also re-
spond to a reduction in dose.

Dr. Alan Schatzberg and his colleagues’ have pointed out
that some patients may seem drunk or intoxicated when
taking MAOIs. Patients may also feel confused and have
trouble with coordination. These adverse reactions are more
likely when the doses are pushed to very high levels. Ob-
viously, the dose should be reduced immediately if these
toxic effects develop. I have personally never seen these
effects because I have never pushed the doses of MAOIs
to unusually high levels.

Two of the MAOI drugs, phenelzine (Nardil) and iso-
carboxazid (Marplan), can have negative effects on the
liver. Therefore, your doctor may want to do a blood test
to monitor levels of certain enzymes that reflect liver func-
tion before you start these drugs, and then again every few
months while you are taking them. Patients with liver dis-
ease or abnormal liver function tests are usually advised
not to take any of the MAOIs, including tranylcypromine
(Parnate).

Dr. Alan F. Schatzberg and his colleagues' have pointed
out that selegiline (Eldepryl) may have fewer side effects
than the other MAOI drugs, at least at low doses. At low
doses, selegiline seems less likely to cause dizziness when
standing, sexual problems, or difficulties sleeping. How-
ever, selegiline is much more expensive than the other
MAOIs, and in most cases the other MAOIs will do the job
just as effectively. In addition, the side effects of all the
MAOI antidepressants tend to be minimal at lower doses.
In my experience, many patients have responded favorably
to low doses of the MAOIs, so selegiline may not really
have any Significant advantages over the two older and
cheaper drugs.

FEELING GOOD 575

As you will learn next, all the MAOIs can cause dan-
gerous blood pressure elevations when patients ingest the
forbidden foods. Selegiline is less likely to have this effect,
but only if the selegiline is taken in small doses (10 mg
per day or less). Larger doses of selegiline are often needed
for psychiatric problems. At these higher doses it is nec-
essary to observe the same dietary precautions that you
would observe with any of the MAOIs. This is unfortunate
because it was initially hoped that depressed patients would
be able to take selegiline and not have to restrict their diets
so religiously.

Hypertensive and Hyperpyretic Crises. In rare cases,
the MAOIs can produce two types of serious toxic reactions
if they are not used properly. This is why so many doctors
avoid using them. With good education and preventive
medications, the MAOIs can be administered safely, but
you will need to study this section quite carefully if you
are taking an MAOI.

One of the dangerous reactions is called a ‘‘hypertensive
crisis.”” ‘“‘Hyper’’ means high and “‘tensive’’ refers to
blood pressure, so a hypertensive crisis is a sudden increase
in your blood pressure. Increases in blood pressure are not
usually dangerous and can occur in many normal situations
even if you are not taking medications. For example, when
you are lifting weights, your blood pressure can easily go
into the range of 180/100 or higher at the moment you are
straining and exerting maximum effort to raise the barbell.
Our bodies are used to these temporary elevations in blood
pressure. However, if you were on an MAOI and you ate
one of the forbidden foods, your blood pressure might in-
crease to dangerous levels and remain elevated for an hour
or more. If you continued to eat the forbidden foods that
interact with the MAOIs, sooner or later a vessel in your
brain could rupture because of the mechanical stress. This
would cause a stroke, certainly an excessive price to pay
for taking an antidepressant.

The initial symptoms of a ruptured or leaking vessel in

576 David D. Burns, M.D.

your brain can include an excruciating headache, a stiff
neck, nausea, vomiting, and sweating. As the bleeding con-
tinues, paralysis, coma, and death can occur. Because of
the danger of hypertensive reactions, your doctor will check
your blood pressure at each session. The risk of a stroke is
higher in individuals over sixty because our arteries become
less resilient with age and are more likely to tear or rupture
when subjected to the stress of a sudden increase in blood
pressure. Regardless of your age, you will need to monitor
your blood pressure and watch your diet carefully when
taking an MAOI.

These hypertensive crises are sometimes also called “‘no-
radrenergic crises’’ because they are thought to be due to
an excessive release of norepinephrine. Norepinephrine is
a transmitter substance used by nerves in your brain and in
your body. Hypertensive crises usually occur if you eat cer-
tain forbidden foods containing a substance called tyramine
or if you take one of the forbidden drugs that I will describe
in detail below. If you are careful, the risk of a serious
hypertensive crisis 1s very small.

The other dangerous reaction to an MAOIT is called a
‘‘hyperpyretic crisis.” ‘‘Pyretic’’ refers to fire, or fever.
The patient with a hyperpyretic crisis may develop a high
fever along with a number of alarming symptoms that can
include sensitivity to light, rapid changes in blood pressure,
rapid breathing, sweating, nausea, vomiting, rigid muscles,
jerking and twitching, confusion, agitation, delirium, sei-
zures, shock, coma, and death. A hyperpyretic crisis is
sometimes also called a ‘‘serotonin syndrome’’ because it
is due to an abnormal and dangerous increase in levels of
serotonin in the brain. A hyperpyretic crisis occurs when
the patient takes certain forbidden medications that must
not be combined with the MAOIs. These drugs cause an
increase in levels of serotonin in the brain. Obviously, a
hyperpyretic crisis requires immediate discontinuation of
the MAOI along with emergency medical treatment. The
treatment may include intravenous fluids and treatment with

FEELING GOOD 577

the serotonin antagonist, cyproheptadine (Periactin), at a
dose of 4 mg to 12 mg.

Several decades ago when MAOIs were first available,
doctors were not as aware of the blood pressure elevations
that resulted from eating foods containing tyramine or from
taking the kinds of drugs described below, and so these
hypertensive reactions were more common and severe.
Now doctors and patients are much more aware of the prob-
lem and the risk is much smaller. In fact, extreme hyper-
tensive and hyperpyretic reactions are quite rare. I am
personally aware of only one patient, treated by a colleague
in Boston, who developed a stroke due to a hypertensive
crisis (noradrenergic syndrome) while taking an MAOI. I
have had about half a dozen patients over the years who
paged me because they suddenly developed elevated blood
pressure. I told each of them to go to a local hospital emer-
gency room for observation. In every case, the blood pres-
sure quickly subsided without any treatment aside from
observation. None of these patients experienced any ad-
verse effects. I have never seen a patient who developed a
hyperpyretic crisis (serotonin syndrome) while on an
MAOI.

This is because we know a great deal about what causes
these two kinds of reactions and how they can be avoided.
If you are taking an MAOI, you will need to educate your-
self by studying the following sections carefully. You will
have to avoid taking certain types of drugs and exercise a
little self-discipline in your diet in order to be safe. You
will find it is well worth the extra effort required to protect
yourself.

How to Avoid a Hypertensive or Hyperpyretic Crisis.
There are two important keys to preventing a hypertensive
or hyperpyretic crisis if you are taking an MAOI. First, you
must obtain a blood-pressure cuff and monitor your own
blood pressure carefully. Second, you must carefully avoid
certain foods or medications (including some street drugs)
that will predictably trigger these reactions. I will describe

578 David D. Burns, M.D.

these forbidden foods and medicines in detail below. You
will see that the substances that can trigger a hypertensive
crisis are somewhat different from the substances that can
trigger a hyperpyretic crisis.

You can obtain a blood-pressure cuff at your local phar-
macy so you can monitor your own blood pressure when-
ever you want. Practice using the cuff. Although it may
seem a little awkward or confusing at first, you will find
that it gets pretty easy to take your blood pressure after you
have practiced a few times. In my practice I have required
every patient taking an MAOI to do this. In the rare situ-
ation where a patient did not want to go to the trouble of
obtaining a cuff and learning how to use it, I have refused
to prescribe an MAOI.

Initially you can monitor your blood pressure once a day
or even twice a day if you are so inclined. After you have
been taking the MAOI for a couple weeks, you will not
need to monitor your blood pressure so frequently. Once a
week will usually be sufficient. You can check your blood
pressure if you forget and eat one of the forbidden foods.
You can also check it if you feel woozy or nauseous or if
you get an excruciating or severe headache. We all get
headaches from time to time, and they rarely ever indicate
a stroke. However, if you have a blood-pressure cuff, you
can check your blood pressure and make sure it is not dan-
gerously elevated.

If your blood pressure goes up to a dangerous level, you
should call your doctor or go to an emergency room. How
much elevation is dangerous? The blood pressure consists
of two numbers. The higher number is called the ‘‘systolic’’
blood pressure and the lower number is called the ‘‘dia-
stolic’’ blood pressure. A value of 120/80, for example,
would be considered normal for most people. Most emer-
gency room doctors would not be particularly concerned
until these numbers reach the range of 190 to 200 over 105
to 110. At that level, they might observe you carefully and
monitor your blood pressure every few minutes. Most of

FEELING GOOD 579

the time, the elevated blood pressure will subside without
treatment. If your blood pressure continues to rise, the ER
doctor could give you an antidote (such as phentolamine or
prazosin) to lower your blood pressure back into a safe
range.

The best time to take your blood pressure is about one
to one and a half hours after you have taken the medication.
About 25 percent of my patients have noted modest blood
pressure elevations at this time even if they have not eaten
any of the forbidden foods in Table 20-8 on pages 580—
581 or taken the medicines in Table 20-9 on pages 584—-
590. These increases were not usually extreme or danger-
ous—a 20- or 30-point elevation in the systolic blood pres-
sure was typical. Nevertheless, in those cases, I have
recommended stopping the medication because these pa-
tients seemed overly sensitive to the effects of the MAOI
on their blood pressure. It just did not seem worth the worry
and risk, especially since a different antidepressant might
be just as effective.

Foods to Avoid. Hypertensive crises may occur if you
eat foods (see Table 20-8) that contain a substance known
as tyramine. If you are taking an MAOJ, too much tyramine
can interfere with your brain’s ability to regulate your blood
pressure. Tyramine causes nerves to release more norepi-
nephrine into the synaptic regions that separate them from
the postsynaptic nerves. These postsynaptic nerves may be-
come overly stimulated when too much norepinephrine is
released. Because these nerves help to regulate blood pres-
sure, all the extra norepinephrine that is released can cause
a dangerous and sudden increase in blood pressure.

You will recall from Chapter 17 that an enzyme called
monoamine oxidase (MAO) is located inside the presynap-
tic nerves. This enzyme usually destroys any excess nor-
epinephrine that builds up inside these nerves and prevents
these nerves from releasing too much norepinephrine when
they fire. But the MAOT drugs block this enzyme, and so
the norepinephrine levels inside these nerves increase sub-

580 David D. Burns, M.D.

Table 20—8. Foods and Beverages to Avoid If You Are Taking a
Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitor (MAOI)?

Foods to Avoid Completely

Cheese, particularly strong or aged cheese (cottage cheese and cream
cheese are allowed)

Beer and ale: particularly tap beers, beers from microbreweries and
strong ales

Red wine: especially Chianti wine

Brewer’s yeast tablets or yeast extracts (breads and cooked forms of
yeast are safe. The yeast extracts from health food stores are
dangerous. Yeast extracts may be found in certain soups. Some
powdered protein diet supplements contain yeast extracts.)

Pods of fava beans, also called Italian green beans (regular green beans
are safe)

Meat or fish that is smoked, dried, fermented, unrefrigerated, or spoiled,
including:

¢ fermented or air-dried sausages, such as salami and mortadella
(some experts state that bologna, pepperoni, summer sausage,
corned beef, and liverwurst are safe)!’

¢ pickled or salted herring

¢ liver (beef or chicken), especially old chicken liver (fresh
chicken liver is safe)

Overripe bananas or avocados (most fruits are completely safe)

Sauerkraut

Some soups, including those made from beef bouillon or Asian soup
stocks (e.g., miso soup). (Tinned and packet soups are felt to be safe,
unless made from bouillon or meat extracts)

Foods or Beverages that May Cause Problems in Large Amounts

White wine or clear alcohol, such as vodka or gin

Sour cream

Yogurt: must be pasteurized and less than 5 days old to be safe
Soy sauce

NutraSweet (the artificial sweetener)

Chocolate

Caffeine in beverages (coffee, tea, and soda) and chocolate

FEELING GOOD 581

Foods or Beverages Once Thought to Cause Problems
which Are Probably Safe in Small Amounts

Figs (avoid overripe figs)

Meat tenderizers

Caviar, snails, tinned fish, pate

Raisins

“Modified from B. McCabe and M. T. Tsuang, ‘‘Dietary Considerations in MAO
Inhibitor Regimens,’’ Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 43 (1982): 178-181.

stantially. When you eat foods containing tyramine, all that
extra norepinephrine suddenly spills into the synaptic re-
gion, causing a massive stimulation of the nerves that reg-
ulate your blood pressure.

If you watch your diet carefully, the likelihood is good
that you will experience no adverse blood-pressure eleva-
tion. The most common trigger is cheese, especially strong
cheese. You will have to give up pizza and grilled cheese
sandwiches for a while if you are taking an MAOI.

Most of the forbidden foods contain the breakdown prod-
ucts of protein—including tyramine. So, for example,
freshly cooked chicken is perfectly safe, but cooked left-
over chicken that has been sitting for a couple days can be
dangerous because tyramine forms when the meat decom-
poses. One of my patients on tranylcypromine (Parnate) ate
some leftover chicken that had been in the refrigerator for
several days. Soon after eating it, he experienced a signif-
icant elevation in blood pressure. This was because the
chicken had partially decomposed due to effects of bacteria.
Fortunately, he was not harmed, but this experience served
as a useful warning to be careful. The fermented or partially
decomposed meats on the list in Table 20-8, such as strong
sausage or smoked fish, as well as strong cheese, may con-
tain large amounts of tyramine and can be especially dan-
gerous. Some experts also advise against eating Chinese
food while taking MAOIs. This may be due to the soy
sauce, the monosodium glutamate, or other ingredients.

How much tyramine is necessary to cause a hypertensive
reaction? This varies quite a bit from person to person. On

582 David D. Burns, M.D.

average, foods containing at least 10 mg of tyramine will
be sufficient to cause a hypertensive crisis if you are taking
phenelzine (Nardil). As little as 5 mg of tyramine may be
sufficient if you are taking tranylcypromine (Parnate). What
foods contain this amount of tyramine? Well, most beers
contain less than 1.5 mg of tyramine, and many contain
less than 1 mg, so you would have to drink several beers
to run a significant risk. However, some ales contain 3 mg
of tyramine per serving, and some tap beers can also be
particularly risky. For example, one serving of Kronen-
bourg, Rotterdam’s Lager, Rotterdam’s Pilsner, or Upper
Canadian Lager contains between 9 and 38 mg of tyra-
mine’’. So even one glass of these beers could be danger-
ous.

Cheeses can also vary greatly. Processed American
cheese contains only about 1 mg of tyramine per serving,
but Liederkranz, New York State cheddar, English Stilton,
blue cheese, Swiss cheese, aged white cheese and Cam-
embert all contain more than 10 mg per single serving."

Suppose you eat one of the forbidden foods by accident,
and then you check your blood pressure and discover that
it does not go up. What does this mean? There is a lot of
individual variation in the sensitivity to the effects of the
forbidden foods. You may be one of those individuals who
is significantly less likely to react with an elevation in blood
pressure. However, you should not become complacent, be-
cause these hypertensive reactions are unpredictable. If you
cheat and eat the forbidden foods from time to time, it is a
lot like playing Russian roulette. You may get away with
it for a while and then discover that you have experimented
once too often. For example, you may eat a piece of pizza
on nine separate occasions without any increase in blood
pressure, and conclude that it is safe to eat pizza. But this
can be very misleading, because the tenth time you eat a
piece of pizza you may experience a sudden and severe
increase in blood pressure. It is not known why this hap-
pens, but it does underscore the importance of consistent
self-discipline if you are taking an MAOI.

FEELING GOOD 583

Medications and Drugs to Avoid. A number of pre-
scription drugs, nonprescription drugs, and street drugs that
can cause a hypertensive or hyperpyretic crisis when com-
bined with MAOIs are listed in Table 20-9 on pages 584—
590. These reactions are especially dangerous and so you
must carefully avoid these drugs. Some of the medications
that interact with MAOIs do not cause such severe reac-
tions. For example, caffeine may cause you to become more
jumpy and jittery than usual. Moderate amounts of caffeine
are reasonably safe, however. (You may think of caffeine
as more of a food than a drug, but it is a mild stimulant.)

The list of drugs that interact with MAOIs includes:

most antidepressants—virtually any of them can be
dangerous;

many antiasthma drugs;

many common cold, cough allergy, sinus, deconges-
tant, and hay fever medications that contain sympatho-
mimetic agents (discussed in detail below) or
dextromethorphan, the cough suppressant. You will
have to check labels carefully, because many over-the-
counter drugs contain these substances;

drugs used in the treatment of diabetes—they may be-
come more potent than usual if you are taking an
MAOI, and can cause your blood sugar to fall more
than expected;

some drugs used in the treatment of low or high blood
pressure—both types of drugs can in some cases cause
blood pressure elevations when combined with
MAOIs;

mood stabilizers and anticonvulsants;

some painkillers, including some local and general an-
esthetics;

sedatives (including alcohol) and tranquilizers—they may
have more pronounced effects than usual when you are

(continues on page 591)

584 David D. Burns, M.D.

Table 20-9. Prescription Drugs and Over-the-Counter Medications
to Avoid If You Are Taking a Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitor (MAOI)?

Note: This list is not exhaustive; new information about drug interactions
comes out frequently. If you are taking an MAOI and any other medication, ask
your doctor and pharmacist if there are any drug interactions.

Antidepressants

Drug
tricyclic antidepressants,”
especially desipramine
(Norpramin, Pertofrane) and
clomipramine (Anafranil)

tetracyclic antidepressants,
especially bupropion
(Wellbutrin)

SSRIs (all are extremely
dangerous)

other MAOIs

serotonin antagonists,
including trazodone (Desyrel)
and nefazodone (Serzone)

mirtazapine (Remeron)

venlafaxine (Effexor)

Comment
Some (e.g., clomipramine) may
cause a hyperpyretic crisis or
seizures; others (e.g.
desipramine) may cause a
hypertensive crisis
hypertensive crisis
(noradrenergic syndrome)

hyperpyretic crisis (serotonin
syndrome)

hyperpyretic crisis (serotonin
syndrome); hypertensive
Crisis (nonadrenergig..
syndrome)

hyperpyretic crisis (serotonin
syndrome)

hypertensive crisis
(noradrenergic syndrome)

hypertensive crisis
(noradrenergic syndrome)

Asthma Medicines

Drug

ephedrine, a bronchodilator
contained in Marax, Quadrinal,
and other asthma drugs

inhalants which contain albuterol
(Proventil, Ventolin),
metaproterenol (Alupent,
Metaprel), or other beta-
adrenergic bronchodilators

theophylline (Theo-Dur), a
common ingredient in asthma
drugs

Comment
hypertensive crisis

blood pressure elevations and a
rapid heart; beclomethasone
and other nonsystemic steroid
inhalers are generally safer

rapid heart and anxiety

FEELING GOOD 585

Cold, Cough, Allergy, Sinus,
Decongestant, and Hay Fever Medications
(including tablets, drops, or sprays)

Drug Comment
antihistamines: terfenadine can cause an increase in MAOI
(Seldane-D) blood levels
dextromethorphan can be hyperpyretic crisis (Serotonin
found in many cold and syndrome); may also cause
cough medications, especially brief episodes of psychosis or
any drug with DM or Tuss in bizarre behavior

its name. These include
Bromarest-DM or -DX,
Dimetane-DX cough syrup,
Dristan Cold & Flu,
Phenergan with
Dextromethorphan,
Robitussin-DM, several
Tylenol cold, cough, and flu
preparations, and many others
ephedrine can be found in hypertensive crisis
Bronkaid, Primatene, Vicks (noradrenergic syndrome)
Vatronol nose drops and
several other asthma and cold

medications.

oxymetazoline (Afrin) nose hypertensive crisis
drops or sprays used to treat (noradrenergic syndrome)
nasal decongestion

phenylephrine can be found in hypertensive crisis
Dimetane, Dristan (noradrenergic syndrome)

decongestant, Neo-Synephrine
nasal spray and nose drops,
and many other similar
preparations, including some
eye drop medications

586 David D. Burns, M.D.

Cold, Cough, Allergy, Sinus,
Decongestant, and Hay Fever Medications
(including tablets, drops, or sprays) cont.

Drug Comment
phenylpropanolamine is hypertensive crisis
contained in Alka-Seltzer (noradrenergic syndrome)

Plus Cold and Night-Time
Cold medicine, Allerest,
Contac decongestants,
Coricidin D decongestants,
Dexatrim appetite pills,
Dimetane-DC Cough syrup,
Ornade Spansules, Robitussin-
CF, Sinarest, St. Joseph Cold
Tablets, Tylenol Cold
medicine, and many others

pseudoephedrine can be found hypertensive crisis
in Actifed, Allerest No (noradrenergic syndrome)
Drowsiness formula,
Benadryl combinations,
CoAdvil, Dimetane-DX
Cough syrup, Dristan Cold
Maximum Strength,
Robitussin-DAC syrup,
Robitussin-PE, Seldane-D
tablets, Sinarest No
Drowsiness, Sinutab,
Sudafed, Triaminic Nite
Light, and numerous Tylenol
allergy, sinus, flu, and cold
preparations, as well as
several Vicks products
including NyQuil, to mention
just a few

Diabetes Medications

Drug Comment
insulin may cause a greater drop in
blood sugar
oral hypoglycemic agents as above

FEELING GOOD 587

Medications for Low Blood Pressure (for patients in shock)

Drug
sympathomimetic amines
including:

dopamine (Intropin)
epinephrine (Adrenalin)
isoproterenol (Isuprel)
metaraminol (Aramine)
methyldopa (Aldomet)

norepinephrine (Levophed)

Comment
hypertensive crisis
(noradrenergic syndrome)
because these drugs cause
blood vessels to constrict

Medications for High Blood Pressure

Drug
guanadrel (Hylorel)
guanethidine (Ismelin)
hydralazine (Apresoline)
methyldopa (Aldomet)
reserpine (Serpasil)

beta-blockers

calcium channel blockers

diuretics

Comment
These blood-pressure
medications may cause a
paradoxical increase in blood
pressure when combined with
MAOIs.

may be more potent when
combined with MAOIs,
leading to a greater-than-
expected drop in blood
pressure and dizziness when
standing

appear to be reasonably safe
when combined with MAOIs.
Check with your doctor and
monitor blood pressure
closely. Watch for a greater-
than-expected drop in blood
pressure

watch for a greater-than-
expected drop in blood
pressure. May increase blood
level of MAOI

588 David D. Burns, M.D.

Mood Stabilizers

Comment

hyperpyretic crisis (serotonin
syndrome); MAOI may cause
carbamazepine levels to fall,
so epileptics may experience
seizures

can cause hyperpyretic crisis
(serotonin syndrome) in
animal studies

Drug
carbamazepine (Tegretol)

lithium (Eskalith)

Painkillers and Anesthetics

Drug Comment

anesthetics: general Tell your anesthesiologist you
are on an MAOLI. If possible,
discontinue the MAOI two
weeks before elective surgery

Muscle relaxants such as

succinylcholine and
tubocurarine may have a
more pronounced or
prolonged effect. General
anesthetics such as halothane
may lead to excitement,
excessive depression of the
brain, or hyperpyretic
reactions

anesthetics: local Some contain epinephrine or
other sympathomimetics—
make sure you tell your
dentist you are taking an

MAOI
cyclobenzaprine (Flexeril) (a hyperpyretic crisis (serotonin
muscle relaxant used to treat syndrome) or severe seizures
muscle spasm)
meperidine (Demerol) A single injection can cause

seizures, coma, and death
(serotonin syndrome). Most
other narcotics, including
morphine and codeine, have
been used safely with MAOIs

FEELING GOOD 589

Sedatives and Tranquilizers

Drug
alcohol

barbiturates (such as
phenobarbital)
buspirone (BuSpar)

Comment

May have enhanced sedative
effects, especially when
combined with phenelzine
(Nardil). This could be
hazardous when driving or
operating dangerous
machinery

enhanced sedative effects as
described above

enhanced sedative effects as

described above

enhanced sedative effects as
described above; some
neuroleptics may cause a
drop in blood pressure when
combined with MAOIs

enhanced sedative effects as
described above

major tranquilizers
(neuroleptics)

minor tranquilizers
(benzodiazepines) such as
alprazolam (Xanax),
diazepam (Valium) and
others

sleeping pills enhanced sedative effects as
described above

hyperpyretic crisis (serotonin
syndrome); blood pressure
elevations; disorientation,
Memory impairment, and
other neurologic changes

L-tryptophan

Stimulants (Pep Pills) and Street Drugs

Drug Comment
amphetamines (speed or crank) the hypertensive crisis
cocaine (noradrenergic syndrome) is
benzedrine possible; methylphenidate is

considered somewhat less
risky than the amphetamines

benzphetamine (Didrex)
dextroamphetamine
(Dexedrine)
methamphetamine (Desoxyn)
methylphenidate (Ritalin)

590 David D. Burns, M.D.

Weight-Loss and Appetite-Suppression Medications

Comment

drug interactions have not been
studied in humans; great
caution should be used; some
experts report that pemoline
has been combined with
MAOIs in some cases’

hyperpyretic crisis (serotonin
syndrome)

hypertensive crisis
(noradrenergic syndrome)

hypertensive crisis
(noradrenergic syndrome)

hypertensive crisis
(noradrenergic syndrome)

hypertensive crisis
(noradrenergic syndrome)

Drug
pemoline (Cylert)

fenfluramine (Pondimin)
phendimetrazine (Plegine)

phentermine and some over-
the-counter meds

phenylpropanolamine
(Acutrim)

stimulants (listed above)

Other MAOI Drug Interactions

Comment
Probably safe in moderate
amounts; avoid large amounts;
may cause blood pressure
elevations, a racing heart, and

Drug
caffeine (in coffee, tea, soda,
chocolate)

anxiety
disulfiram (Antabuse) (used to Severe reactions when mixed
treat alcoholism) with an MAOI

L-dopa (Sinemet) (used to treat
Parkinson’s disease)

hypertensive crisis
(noradrenergic syndrome)

“Information in this table was obtained from several sources including the Manual
of Clinical Psychopharmacology' and Psychotropic Drugs Fast Facts.‘’ These ex-
cellent references are highly recommended.

"Many patients have been successfully treated with a combination of an MAOI and
a tricyclic antidepressant under close observation, but such drug combinations are
dangerous and require a high level of expert supervision.

FEELING GOOD 591

taking an MAOI. The increased sleepiness could be
hazardous if you are driving;

L-tryptophan—the natural amino acid;

stimulants (pep pills) and street drugs;

many weight-loss (appetite suppressing) medications;

caffeine, which is present in coffee, tea, many sodas,
hot cocoa, and chocolate. Caffeine is also present in a
number of prescription and nonprescription medica-
tions such as Cafergot suppositories and tablets, Dar-
von Compound-65, NoD6z, Fiorinal, Excedrin, and
many other cold or pain preparations;

Disulfiram (Antabuse), used to treat alcoholism;

Levo-dopa, used in the treatment of Parkinson’s dis-
ease.

Drugs that are categorized as sympathomimetics are par-
ticularly dangerous because they are contained in many
over-the-counter drugs for common ailments such as colds.
They are called sympathomimetics because they tend to
mimic the effects of the sympathetic nervous system, which
is involved in the control of blood pressure.

Several sympathomimetic drugs are found in large num-
bers of prescription and over-the-counter cold preparations,
cough medicines, decongestants, and hay fever medica-
tions. These include ephedrine, phenylephrine, phenylpro-
panolamine and pseudoephedrine. For example, ephedrine
can be found in Bronkaid, Primatene, Vicks’ Vatronol nose
drops, and several other cold and asthma medications.
Phenylephrine can be found in Dimetane, Dristan decon-
gestants, Neo-Synephrine nasal spray and nose drops, and
many other similar preparations. Phenylpropanolamine is
contained in Alka-Seltzer Plus Cold Medicines, Contac de-
congestants, Coricidin D decongestants, Dexatrim appetite
suppressant pills, Dimetane-DC Cough syrup, Ornade
Spansules, Robitussin-CF, Sinarest, St. Joseph Cold Tab-
lets, and many other cold medicines. Pseudoephedrine can

592 David D. Burns, M.D.

be found in Actifed, Advil Cold & Sinus, Allerest No-
Drowsiness formula, Benadryl combinations, Dimetane-DX
Cough syrup, Dristan Cold Maximum Strength,
Robitussin-DAC syrup, Robitussin-PE, Seldane-D tablets,
Sinarest No Drowsiness, Sinutab, Sudafed, Triaminic Nite
Light, and numerous Tylenol allergy, sinus, flu, and cold
preparations, as well as several Vicks products including
NyQuil, to mention just a few.

Some cold and cough preparations contain dextrome-
thorphan. This is not a sympathomimetic drug, but a cough
suppressant. Dextromethorphan is on the list of forbidden
medications because it can cause a hyperpyretic crisis. Dex-
tromethorphan can be found in any drug with ‘“‘DM”’ or
‘*Tuss’’ in its name, as well as many preparations without
these suffixes. A few examples are Bromarest-DM or -DX,
Dimetane-DX Cough syrup, Dristan Cold & Flu, Phenergan
with Dextromethorphan, Robitussin-DM, several Tylenol
cold, cough, and flu preparations, and many other medi-
cations as well.

Because so many common over-the-counter medications
contain sympathomimetics or dextromethorphan, it is
nearly impossible to keep up with all of them. You can best
protect yourself by reading the warning labels that come
with these medications and by checking with your doctor
or pharmacist before you combine any with an MAOI.

Diabetics taking MAOIs need to know that the MAOIs
may also cause blood levels of insulin as well as some oral
hypoglycemic agents to increase. As a result, your blood
sugar may fall more than expected. This can cause a hy-
poglycemic reaction, with dizziness, faintness, sweating,
and so forth, because your brain does not get enough sugar
from your blood. Your doctor may have to adjust the doses
of your diabetic medications if you are on an MAOI.

Any of the MAOIs can lower your blood pressure, and
so they can intensify the effects of other blood-pressure
medications your doctor has prescribed, including diuretics
and beta-blockers. The MAOIs can also cause the blood
levels of a number of blood-pressure medications to in-

FEELING GOOD 593

crease. This also tends to intensify their effects. As noted
above, some blood-pressure medications can have the par-
adoxical effect of causing an increase in blood pressure if
you are taking an MAOI. Make sure you let your doctor
know about the MAOI. Many major tranquilizers (neuro-
leptics) can also cause blood pressure to fall, and MAOIs
can increase this effect as well.

Some painkillers must be avoided if you are taking an
MAOI. For example, a single injection of the painkiller
meperidine (Demerol) has been known to cause seizures,
coma, and death in patients taking MAOIs. Other opiates,
including morphine, are thought to be safer. Most mild non-
prescription painkillers, such as aspirin or Tylenol, are also
thought to be safe as long as they contain no caffeine. How-
ever, cyclobenzaprine (Flexeril), which is commonly used
to treat local muscle spasm, can cause fever, seizures, and
death. This drug should be avoided entirely.

Many local and general anesthetics can also interact with
the MAOIs. Some local anesthetics contain epinephrine or
other sympathomimetic drugs that can create hypertensive
reactions. Inform your dentist that you are taking an MAOI
so she or he can choose a local anesthetic that will be safe
for you. If you require elective surgery while on an MAOI,
it would be best to discontinue the MAOI for one or two
weeks prior to the surgery. Some general anesthetics, such
as halothane, can cause excitement or excessive sedation as
well as hyperpyretic reactions when combined with an
MAOI. The muscle relaxants used by anesthesiologists,
such as succinylcholine or tubocurarine, may also have
more potent effects. Make sure you inform your anesthe-
sidlogist if you are taking an MAOI.

Sedative drugs, including alcohol, major tranquilizers
(neuroleptics) and minor tranquilizers, barbiturates and
sleeping pills, can interact with MAOIs. This is especially
true for phenelzine (Nardil). Because phenelzine also tends
to be sedating, it can enhance the effects of any other sed-
ative agent. You should try to avoid combining MAOIs
with sedative drugs because the sleepiness you experience

594 David D. Burns, M.D.

could be hazardous, especially if you are driving or oper-
ating dangerous machinery.

L-tryptophan is another sedative agent that should not be
combined with MAOIs because it can cause a hyperpyretic
crisis (serotonin syndrome). L-tryptophan is an essential
amino acid that is present in certain foods such as meats
and dairy products. It used to be available in health food
stores and has been actively promoted as a natural sedative
agent to help people with insomnia. It has also been used
as a treatment for depression, but the evidence for its an-
tidepressant effects is meager at best. Following ingestion,
L-tryptophan rapidly accumulates in the brain, where it is
converted into serotonin. If the dose of L-tryptophan is
large enough, you will begin to feel sleepy. If you are tak-
ing an MAOT, the increase in brain serotonin may be mas-
sive. This 1s because your brain cannot metabolize the
excess serotonin when you are on an MAOTI, so the levels
of serotonin can escalate to dangerous levels, triggering the
serotonin syndrome.

However, some researchers have purposely treated de-
pressed patients with an MAOI plus 2 to 6 grams per day
of L-tryptophan in an attempt to make the MAOIT treatment
more effective. The purpose of these augmentation strate-
gies 1S to convert a drug nonresponder into a drug re-
sponder. Some studies have indicated that this combination
can be more potent than treatment with an MAOT alone.
Such a treatment is somewhat dangerous, and should prob-
ably be administered by experts and reserved for patients
with very difficult, resistant depressions.” Dr. Jonathan
Cole and his colleagues have given doses of 3 to 6 grams
of L-tryptophan to patients who had been taking an MAOI
for several weeks or more.’ They observed some early signs
of the serotonin syndrome in these patients, suggesting the
potential benefits of this drug combination may not be
worth the risk.

In animal studies, the combination of lithium with an
MAOI can also cause the serotonin syndrome. This is be-
cause lithium causes L-tryptophan to enter the brain more
rapidly. L-tryptophan is present in the foods we eat, and a

FEELING GOOD 595

large meal can contain as much as | gram of L-tryptophan.
If you combine lithium with an MAOI, you may get a large
increase in serotonin in your brain following meals. How-
ever, some doctors have added lithium to an MAOIT if the
MAOI has not been effective, in just the same way they
might add L-tryptophan to try to augment the antidepres-
sant effect of the MAOI. If you receive lithium plus an
MAOI, you must be monitored closely to make sure you
do not develop any symptoms of the serotonin syndrome,
such as fever, tremor, jerking of the muscles, or confusion.

MAOIs are often combined with lithium for another rea-
son. Bipolar patients with abnormal episodic mood eleva-
tions as well as depression are often maintained indefinitely
on lithium or another mood stabilizer, as described below.
During the depressed phase of the cycle, many bipolar pa-
tients will need an antidepressant as well as lithium to re-
verse the depression. The MAOIs, as well as many other
kinds of antidepressants, have been used safely and suc-
cessfully in this way. However, patients need to be moni-
tored closely for signs of hyperpyretic crises as well as
episodes of mania, which can occur on rare occasions when
bipolar patients receive antidepressants.

Stimulants, pep pills, and weight-loss pills are especially
dangerous when combined with MAOIs. Some of these
drugs are categorized as sympathomimetics, and they can
cause hypertensive crises. For example, methylphenidate
(Ritalin), which is widely used for the treatment of attention
deficit disorder in children and adults, is a sympathomi-
metic that could have this effect. Several commonly abused
street or prescription drugs are also sympathomimetics.
These include the amphetamines such as Benzedrine, Dex-
edrine, and Methedrine (also known as ‘‘speed’’ or
‘‘crank’’) and cocaine. Amphetamines used to be pre-
scribed for weight loss, but their abuse potential is so high
that most doctors no longer prescribe them for this purpose.
However, a number of the newer popular weight-loss drugs
can also be quite dangerous when mixed with MAOIs. For
example, phentermine (Adipex; Fastin) can cause hyperten-

596 David D. Burns, M.D.

Sive reactions and fenfluramine (Pondimin), the controver-
sial weight-loss drug that was recently in vogue, can lead
to hyperpyretic crises.

As you know, caffeine is also a mild stimulant. It can
cause racing of the heart, an irregular heartbeat, or in-
creased blood pressure if you are taking an MAOI. Al-
though coffee, tea, soda, and chocolate all contain caffeine,
they are not strictly forbidden, especially in moderate
amounts, because their effects are usually mild. Neverthe-
less, you should avoid caffeine in large quantities because
it could precipitate a hypertensive crisis. Some experts rec-
ommend a daily maximum of two cups of coffee or tea, or
two sodas. In addition, if you monitor your blood pressure
with your own blood-pressure cuff, as described above, you
can see whether that cup or two of coffee you love in the
morning is actually causing a rise in blood pressure. If so,
then you should cut down or give up caffeine completely
while you are on the MAOI.

You can see in Table 20-9 that L-dopa (levodopa),
which is used in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease, can
also cause increases in blood pressure when combined with
an MAOI. However, patients with Parkinson’s disease are
sometimes treated with the MAOI selegiline, as well as other
medicines. If these patients receive an MAOI along with
L-dopa, the L-dopa should be started at a very small dose
and increased slowly while checking the blood pressure.

As noted above, most of the forbidden drugs have warn-
ing labels to indicate they can be dangerous when combined
with some antidepressant medications. If you are taking an
MAOI, check the warning labels carefully before you take
any new drug, and always check with your druggist or doc-
tor as well. For a detailed list of drugs that cause hyperten-
Sive reactions for patients on MAOIs, see pages 157-160
of Psychotropic Drugs Fast Facts by Drs. Jerrold S. Max-
men and Nicholas G. Ward.'’ The Physician’s Desk Ref-
erence (PDR)*' also lists dangerous drug interactions for
any prescription medication you may be taking. It is avail-
able in any library, drugstore, or medical clinic.

FEELING GOOD 597

The lists of forbidden foods and medications may seem
somewhat confusing or overwhelming. If your doctor pre-
scribes an MAOI, she or he can give you a card to carry
in your wallet that lists the foods and drugs to avoid. When
in doubt, you can check the card. Some experts advise pa-
tients on MAOIs to carry Med-Alert cards so that any emer-
gency room doctors will know that they are taking an
MAOIT in case they are in an accident or found unconscious
and in need of emergency treatment. Then the doctors can
take appropriate precautions when administering anesthesia
or prescribing other drugs for you.

Remember that the chemical effects of an MAOI remain
in your body for as much as one to two weeks after you
stop taking it. This is why you must continue to observe
the drug and dietary precautions for at least two weeks after
you have taken your last MAOI. I would suggest that you
actually wait a bit longer. Then you can begin to eat the
forbidden foods, such as cheese, in small amounts at first,
followed by blood-pressure checks. If your blood pressure
is not affected, you can gradually increase the amount you
eat until your diet is back to normal. Similarly, if you are
switching from an MAOI to another antidepressant, you
will have to be completely drug-free for two weeks after
you take your last MAOI before starting the new antide-
pressant.

The same is true if you are starting an MAOI after you
have taken another medication—you will have to wait for
a period of time, depending on which medication you took.
You will recall that you have to wait at least five weeks
before starting an MAOI after going off Prozac because this
drug remains in your blood for a prolonged time. Most of
the other SSRIs are cleared out of your body more rapidly
than Prozac, and so a two-week waiting period is usually
sufficient. Some antidepressant drugs, such as nefazodone
(Serzone) and trazodone (Desyrel), leave your body even
faster, and you may have to wait only one week after taking
them before starting an MAOI. Always check with your
physician before making any changes in your medications.

598 David D. Burns, M.D.

Well, by now you may be asking whether it is worth it
to take a drug like an MAOI which may seem so compli-
cated and dangerous. This question is especially relevant
these days, when so many newer and safer drugs are avail-
able. Usually, I would try at least two other drugs first. The
SSRI drugs, in particular, often help the same types of pa-
tients who used to benefit from the MAOIs. I would like
to emphasize, however, that in my experience, the MAOIs
can usually be administered safely. I have prescribed them
for many patients over the years. When doses are kept at a
modest level, the side effects tend to be minimal. And when
the MAOIs do work, their effects can be quite phenomenal.

In fact, some of my most impressive successes with med-
ications have been with these MAOI drugs, especially tran-
ylcypromine (Parnate). In addition, I have used these drugs
with difficult patients who had experienced many unsuc-
cessful treatments with drugs as well as psychotherapy.
When these individuals did improve, the degree of im-
provement was sometimes extreme. These positive experi-
ences with MAOIs have made a strong impression on me.
I believe the enthusiasm of the physicians who use the
MAOIs is quite justified. If your physician suggests a med-
ication of this type, it might prove to be well worth the
necessary extra effort (taking your blood pressure daily),
sacrifice (no pizza!), and self-discipline (avoiding certain
foods and medicines).

One last note is that a newer and safer MAOI drug, mo-
clobemide, is being marketed in other parts of the world,
including Canada, Europe, and South America. Unlike the
MAOIs described above, the effects of moclobemide do not
persist after you stop taking it. In addition, it does not seem
to interact with tyramine in the diet to nearly the same
degree. Dr. Alan Schatzberg and his colleagues’ have
pointed out that moclobemide appears to have very few side
effects and that the risk of serious drug interactions is rel-
atively low. Psychiatrists hope that moclobemide or another
new MAOI called brofaromine will eventually be marketed
in the United States.

FEELING GOOD 599

Serotonin Antagonists

Two antidepressant drugs in the table on pages 514-515
are Classified as ‘‘serotonin antagonists.’’ They are trazo-
done (Desyrel) and nefazodone (Serzone). Their mecha-
nism of action appears to be somewhat different from most
other antidepressants. Trazodone and nefazodone can boost
serotonin by blocking its reuptake at nerve synapses, much
like the SSRIs described above. However, these drugs have
less potent effects on the serotonin pump than the SSRIs,
or even the older tricyclic antidepressants, and this is prob-
ably not how these drugs work.

As described in Chapter 17, trazodone and nefazodone
appear to block some of the serotonin receptor sites on
postsynaptic nerve membranes. At least fifteen different
kinds of serotonin receptors have been discovered in the
brain. The two receptors that are blocked by trazodone
and nefazodone are called 5-HT,, and 5-HT,,. receptors.
5-HT is simply shorthand for serotonin; the number and
letter after the 5-HT identify the specific type of receptor.
Trazodone and nefazodone indirectly stimulate another
type of serotonin receptor called the 5-HT,, receptor.
This receptor is thought to be important in depression,
anxiety, and violence. According to one theory, the stim-
ulation of these 5-HT,, receptor sites might explain the
antidepressant effects of trazodone and nefazodone. In
addition, trazodone and nefazodone are effective anti-
anxiety drugs. If you tend to be nervous and worried,
like many depressed individuals, these medications may
be especially helpful for you.

Doses of Trazodone and Nefazodone. The starting
dose for trazodone 1s 50 to 100 mg per day. Most patients
will do well on 150 mg to 300 mg per day. The starting
dose for nefazodone is 50 mg twice per day. The doses of
both drugs can be increased very slowly over several weeks
to a maximum of 600 mg per day.

Nefazodone and trazodone have short half-lives. The

600 David D. Burns, M.D.

half-life is the time it takes your body to get rid of half of
the drug that is in your system. A drug with a short half-
life leaves the blood fairly rapidly and must be taken two
or three times per day. In contrast, a drug like Prozac, with
an extremely long half-life, leaves your body slowly and
needs to be taken only once per day.

As with any antidepressant, you should monitor your
mood with a test like the one in Chapter 2 while taking
trazodone and nefazodone. This will show whether the
drugs are working, and to what extent. If you have not
improved substantially after three or four weeks, it may be
wise to switch to another drug. Although withdrawal symp-
toms are quite rare for these medications, it is wise to taper
off nefazodone and trazodone slowly, rather than stopping
them suddenly. This is good advice with any antidepres-
sant.

Side Effects of Trazodone and Nefazodone. The most
common side effects of these two drugs are listed in Table
20-10 on page 601. One common side effect is stomach
upset (such as nausea). This side effect is also common
with the SSRIs and other drugs that stimulate the serotonin
systems in the brain. The upset stomach is more likely
when nefazodone and trazodone are taken on an empty
stomach, and so it can be helpful to take them with food,
just like the SSRIs.

Trazodone and nefazodone can also cause dry mouth in
some patients. Both drugs can also cause a temporary drop
in blood pressure when you stand up, resulting in dizziness
or light-headedness. Trazodone is much more likely to
cause these problems than nefazodone. Elderly people are
more prone to dizziness and fainting, and so nefazodone
may be a better choice for them. As discussed above, sev-
eral things can alleviate this problem: get up more slowly;
walk in place when you get up so as to ‘‘pump’’ blood
back to your heart from your legs; use support stockings;
and take adequate amounts of fluid and salt to prevent any
dehydration. Talk to your doctor if you have problems with

"SSOUSANIAJJO BUIONPAI MOYIM $)99]Jo OpIs DONpar Udo uRd aSOp aIp BUTONpoY “st aSop ou} BBE] MOY UO pusdop osTe ][IM pur syenprAIpur SuouIe
AIeA [[IM Jaffa Opis ayy Jo AjsusyUT eMoe oy], ‘dopoaap [[IM J09JJo Opts sepNonsed v yey) poourpayy oy} 0} JoJor g]qQe) sp) UT sSUNeI +++ 0} + UL,

(1X9} 908

corel) wusidend ‘Ajarxue ‘uoisnyuoo

‘ssouldagis ‘onsyey ‘ayoepeay ‘UOISTA

pounyq ‘uonednsuos ‘yoeurojs yosdn
‘yeoIy) pue yINoul AIp ‘ssautzzip 0

uoIsnjuos
‘UOISIA JeULIOUGE SUOISIA paLinyq
“SSOUIZZIP ‘ssouyeom ‘uoledysuos
‘BOSNVU SBIULIOSUT ‘ssoupam)
Soysepesy ‘yeoi1y) pue yynow Arp +

S401d9I04
(CW) aiuiuvosnu

uoluajay KADULAD

slaaffq aps
juvdYfius1g 40 uowMo?)

‘qapaH] papaads ‘yinow Ug
‘uoyodijsuo) ‘Uuo1siA pasingg

+++ 0} +4 +++ (je1A4saq) su0poze.y

++ ++ 01 + (9U0Z.19S) aUOpOzeyoU

ssojdazad (0) s10jda2ad

4ojdaday uipig

JIdsauaspo-vydjp | (yy) aunuvjsiy

uIDD) 1Ys19ay
puv uolppas

SsouIzzigq; pup
ssaupapvayy-lysr] woaffy apis

"S]DaJJO OpIS Snorosuep Inq

OIBI SB [JOM SP “Pajsl] are sJuaned JO BOW JO YO] JO %C Ul 1INd90 Jey) s}OaTJo apis ‘Te1oues uy ‘“aATSUdYyoIdUIOD 4OU SI ISI] SIU], :330N

eS|sjuobejuy ULUOJOIES JO SJISYQ OPIS ‘Ol-0% B1GEL

602 David D. Burns, M.D.

dizziness or other side effects; she or he may be able to
lower the dose.

Another major side effect of trazodone is that it makes
you sleepy. This is why it is best taken at night. If you are
taking another antidepressant, your doctor may also pre-
scribe a small dose of trazodone at bedtime in order to
promote sleep. This is because some antidepressants, such
as Prozac and the MAOIs, tend to be stimulating and may
interfere with sleep. Trazodone is not addictive and it will
not cause dependency or addiction the way some sleeping
pills do. The calming, sedative effects of trazodone also
help to reduce anxiety. If you tend to be worried and high-
strung, this may be a good drug for you. Nefazodone is
much less sedating than trazodone, and is not a useful med-
ication for insomnia. In fact, it can occasionally have the
opposite effect of causing restlessness, in much the same
way that the SSRIs do.

Another adverse side effect of trazodone is called ‘‘pri-
apism.’’ Priapism is an involuntary erection of the penis.
Fortunately, this side effect is quite rare, occurring in ap-
proximately one male patient out of 6,000. It has been re-
ported in only a few hundred cases so far. Personally, I
have never seen a case of priapism, but men who take tra-
zodone should be aware that it is remotely possible. If the
priapism is not treated right away, it can lead to damage to
the penis and permanent impotence (the inability to get an
erection). Some patients require surgery to correct the pri-
apism. Injecting a drug like epinephrine directly into the
penis can sometimes counteract the priapism if you catch
it quickly enough. If this unusual side effect does occur, or
if you are beginning to notice an erection that will not go
away, contact your doctor or go to an emergency room right
away. Nefazodone, on the other hand, does not cause pri-
apism.

Priapism sounds frightening, but I do not mean to dis-
courage men from taking this medication. If you read the

FEELING GOOD 603

Physician’s Desk Reference carefully, you will see that
there is a remote chance of a dangerous side effect from
nearly any drug you might take, including aspirin. Priapism
is a very unlikely side effect of trazodone and can be treated
at any emergency room if you act rapidly when the symp-
tom first develops.

Some patients taking these drugs report visual ‘‘trails’’
or afterimages when they are looking at objects that are
moving. This side effect is also quite unusual and similar
in some respects to the visual images reported by individ-
uals who take LSD, but not dangerous. These visual trails
are more common with nefazodone than with trazodone and
occur in slightly more than 10 percent of patients taking
this drug. They often improve over time.

Drug Interactions for Trazodone and Nefazodone.
As noted earlier, some drug combinations can be dangerous
because one drug causes the level of the other drug in your
blood to become excessively high. Nefazodone has the ef-
fect of raising the blood level of a number of drugs. These
include commonly prescribed drugs for anxiety, including
many of the minor tranquilizers such as alprazolam
(Xanax), triazolam (Halcion), buspirone (BuSpar) and oth-
ers. As a result, you should be very cautious when com-
bining these drugs with nefazodone, because you could
become excessively sleepy.

Trazodone will also enhance the sedative effects of other
sedative drugs because trazodone itself will make you
sleepy. Consequently, trazodone or nefazodone can en-
hance the sedative effects of any drug that makes you
sleepy, such as alcohol, barbiturates, sleeping pills, pain-
killers, some major tranquilizers (neuroleptics), and some
antidepressants. Be very cautious if you combine any sed-
ative agents with nefazodone or trazodone, especially if you
are driving or operating dangerous machinery.

Nefazodone can increase the levels of several tricyclic

604 David D. Burns, M.D.

antidepressants in your blood, especially amitriptyline
(Elavil), clomipramine (Anafranil), and imipramine (Tof-
ranil), so the doses of these drugs may need to be lower
than usual.

If nefazodone is combined with one of the SSRIs, there
is the possibility that a metabolite of nefazodone called
mCPP (m-chlorophenylpiperazine) could build up in your
blood. This substance may lead to agitation or feelings of
panic or unhappiness. If you are switching from an SSRI
to nefazodone, mCPP could also build up because the ef-
fects of the SSRIs can persist in your body for several
weeks after you stop taking them. Neither trazodone nor
nefazodone should be combined with an MAOI antidepres-
sant because this combination could trigger the serotonin
syndrome (hyperpyretic crisis) described previously.

If you are taking nefazodone, make sure you inform your
psychiatrist about any blood-pressure medication you are
taking, and inform your general medical doctor as well.
Your blood pressure may drop more than expected if you
combine trazodone with a blood-pressure medication. If
your blood pressure does drop too much, you may notice
dizziness when you suddenly stand up. Many psychiatric
medications can also lower the blood pressure, including
many of the tricyclic antidepressants as well as a number
of the major tranquilizers (neuroleptics). If these drugs are
combined with trazodone or nefazodone, the drop in blood
pressure may be pronounced.

Trazodone can also cause increased blood levels of the
anticonvulsant, phenytoin (Dilantin) as well as the heart
medication, digoxin (Lanoxin). These combinations can
lead to toxic blood levels of phenytoin or digoxin. Make
sure your doctor inonitors your blood levels of phenytoin
or digoxin carefully if you take trazodone, as excessively
high levels can be dangerous.

The effects of trazodone on the blood thinner, warfarin
(Coumadin) are unpredictable. The levels of warfarin may

FEELING GOOD 605

increase or decrease. If the warfarin levels increase, you
may have a greater tendency to bleed, and if the warfarin
decreases, your blood may have a greater tendency to clot.
Your doctor can monitor any changes with blood tests and
adjust the dose of warfarin if necessary.

Even more dangerous are the previously described inter-
actions between nefazodone and two commonly prescribed
antihistamines that are given for allergies (terfenadine, trade
name Seldane) and astemizole (trade name Hismanal). Ne-
fazodone causes the levels of these two antihistamines to
increase, which can result in potentially fatal changes in
heart rhythms. Nefazodone should not be combined with
cisapride (trade name Propulsid, a stimulant for the gastro-
intestinal tract) for the same reason—sudden fatal heart
failure can result.

Bupropion (Wellbutrin)

Three other types of antidepressant drugs are listed in the
Table of Antidepressants on pages 514-515. These include
bupropion (Wellbutrin), venlafaxine (Effexor), and muirta-
zapine (Remeron). They are somewhat different from each
other and from the antidepressants already discussed.

Bupropion was supposed to be introduced in the United
States in 1986, but its release was delayed until 1989 be-
cause a number of patients with bulimia (binge-eating fol-
lowed by vomiting) who were treated with this drug had
seizures. Further studies indicated that the danger of sei-
zures was related to the dose of bupropion and that the risk
was much lower in patients who did not have eating dis-
orders, so the drug was released again. Because of the in-
creased seizure risk with bupropion, the manufacturer
recommends that this drug not be prescribed to anyone with
a history of epilepsy, a major head injury, a brain tumor,
bulimia, or anorexia nervosa.

Bupropion does not affect the serotonin system in the

606 David D. Burns, M.D.

brain. Instead, 1t seems to work by potentiating the norep-
inephrine system, much like the tricyclic antidepressant
called desipramine (Norpramin). There is also some evi-
dence that it may stimulate the dopamine system in the
brain, but these effects are much weaker, and it is not clear
whether they contribute to the antidepressant effects of bu-
propion. Nevertheless, bupropion is sometimes classified as
a ‘‘combined noradrenergic-dopaminergic antidepressant,’’
because of its effects on the norepinephrine and dopamine
systems.

Bupropion is used to treat depressed outpatients and in-
patients over the entire range of depression severity. Pre-
liminary studies suggest that it may also be useful for a
number of other problems, including smoking cesSation, so-
cial phobia, and attention deficit disorder. These widespread
effects of bupropion do not mean this drug is special, how-
ever. Nearly all antidepressants have been reported to be at
least partially effective for a wide array of problems in-
cluding depression, all of the anxiety disorders, eating dis-
orders, anger and violence, chronic pain, and many other
problems as well. One possible interpretation for these find-
ings is that these drugs may not really be specific antide-
pressants. Instead, they may have widespread effects
throughout the brain.

A new use for bupropion is to enhance the effects of the
SSRI antidepressants. Suppose, for example, that you are
taking a drug like Prozac but you have not responded to it
adequately. Instead of switching you to a new drug, your
doctor may add a low dose of bupropion in an attempt to
enhance the effect of the Prozac. Bupropion, in doses of up
to 225 mg to 300 mg per day, has been added to SSRI
antidepressants in an attempt to combat the sexual side ef-
fects of SSRIs, such as loss of libido and difficulties having
orgasms.

In my clinical experience, the effects of these drug com-
binations have often been disappointing. I would usually
prefer to try another medication rather than combining
drugs when a medication does not work. I am personally

FEELING GOOD 607

concerned that in some instances patients may be in danger
of being overmedicated by physicians who are a bit too
enthusiastic about adding more and more drugs in larger
and larger doses. Also, because I rely so heavily on psy-
chotherapeutic interventions in my own clinical work, I do
not feel so much pressure to find a solution from drugs
alone. Therefore I do not feel quite so much concern when
One or more medications fails to work. I simply switch to
another medication and continue to try a variety of new
psychotherapeutic strategies, a combination that I find most
successful.

Doses of Bupropion. You can see in Table 20-1 on
pages 518-523 that the usual dose range for bupropion is
200 to 450 mg per day. At doses below 450 mg per day,
the risk of seizures appears to be about four patients per
1000. However, the risk is ten times higher at doses above
450 mg per day—four patients per 100 will experience sel-
zures. Whenever possible, it is good to keep the dose in the
lower range to minimize the chance of seizures. In addition,
no single dose should ever be greater than 150 mg.

Side Effects of Bupropion. The most common side ef-
fects of bupropion are listed in Table 20-11 on pages 608-
609. Unlike the tricyclics, bupropion does not cause dry
mouth, constipation, dizziness, or tiredness. It also does not
stimulate the appetite. This is a big bonus for patients who
have been bothered by weight gain. However, some pa-
tients have reported upset stomach (nausea).

Bupropion is also somewhat activating and can cause
insomnia. Therefore, it may be relatively more effective for
depressed patients who tend to feel tired, lethargic, and un-
motivated—the stimulating effect may help get you mov-
ing. In this regard, it is similar to some of the tricyclic
antidepressants (for example, desipramine), the SSRIs (for
example, Prozac) and the MAOIs (for example, tranylcy-
promine).

‘AJOIXUB SVIULOSUI ‘ssouISMOIP
‘oyoepeoy ‘suneoms ‘uoryedysuos
‘aiodde jo ssoy ‘yoeuiois josdn
‘Jeo pue YINoU AIP ‘ssoulzzIp

SaInzias ‘seo

Ul SUIZUII ‘YseI ‘ssoUuIZZIp ‘Bulyeoms
‘AJOIXUB {IOUS ‘ssoussapsar
‘eIULOSUT ‘oyoepeoy ‘Suljeoms ‘ured
yorusoys ‘ayadde jo ssoy ‘yoeuio}s
yosdn ‘yeory) aos ‘yynowl Arp

syoaff] apis
JuvdYfiusig 40 UOUWUO7D

+ 010

SLOIAIIAA
(CW) ouivosnu

uoyuajay Cavuipy

‘vay papaads ‘yinow aq
‘UONDAISUOD ‘UOISIA pasin]g

+ 010

siojdazad ('10)
I1849UaIPD-DY GD

Ssauizzigg puv
SsaupapvaH-JY4sry]

+ 010

SAO]dII9L
(H) aununysry

UID) 1Yd1aM
pup uolvpas

(4OX9jJq)
UIXBJE[UDA

(ULQNQ]II MA)
uordoadng

40jdaday uivig

poaff] apis

"$]DOJJO OPIS snosesuep 3nq
SIV] SB [JOM SPB ‘polst] ov SsyUdTIed Jo DIOUI IO A%O] 10 %C UI INDIO Jey} S}DOJJa OpIS ‘Je1oUds Ul ‘AAISUDYOIdUIOD jOU ST ISI] STW] :330N

eSjuessaidepiuy JOUIO JO SIOJZ OPIS "LL-OZ aIGeL

"SSOUSANIAZJO ZuLONpar NOYIM SJOoJJd pis Sonpol USIJO UBD osOp sy) BUIONpoy ‘st asop sy) OBse_ Moy UO puddap osyE [IM pur sfenplAIpul Suowe
AIBA [IM 199}JOo Apts stp Jo AyIsusUT pene sayy ‘dopsaop ]JIM Wajo apis JelnonIEd wv Jey) POOYTOYT otf) 0} JoJor s[qei sty) UI sBuNeZ + +4 0} + SY],

SOPLIDOA[SLY}

pue [03a}SI{OYD JO sfaAo] pooyq
posvaloul osned osTe ued “yeayjo
Opis snolosuep nq oel & ‘UNOS
{[99 SYM Ol) Ul [Jef eI & SJVOIpUL
P[NOS sTy], “(A9A0} SB YONs) UOHSajuI
uv JO SUSIS dOJDAOP NOA JI ‘GW
JINOA JNsUOD :SUIUIe AA “SSOUIZZIpP
‘ssourtdass ‘uonedysuos ‘ures yystom
pue ajnodde poseoiour ‘yjnou! Asp

amssaid poolq poseosoul

‘SUIVOIP [eULIOUGE ‘X9S Ul JSOIOUI
JO SSO] ‘UISeSIO YIM SUIO[QoOId
‘UOISIA PLING “JOUISN SssouyevoM

4 erste neendeeanemeepaied de EEE Doth bee eanteleny eit teianrnmnignagiehtntsantititietiesaeneindt rien eta Hieinetiniendite sereernt ot

(UOI1IUIDY)
++ 0} + ++ +++ ourdezezayur

Ge eS jo me

610 David D. Burns, M.D.

Drug Interactions for Bupropion. Because bupropion
can substantially increase the risk of seizures, it should not
be combined with other drugs that can also make a person
more vulnerable to seizures. This includes many psychiatric
drugs such as the tricyclic and tetracyclic antidepressants,
the SSRIs, the two serotonin antagonists (trazodone and
nefazodone), and many of the major tranquilizers (neuro-
leptics). In addition, there is a greatly increased risk of se1-
zures when alcoholics suddenly stop drinking or when
individuals abruptly stop taking minor tranquilizers (ben-
zodiazepines such as Xanax or Valium), barbiturates, or
sleeping pills. Bupropion is therefore especially risky for
alcoholics and for individuals taking sedatives or tranquil-
izers regularly.

Many nonpsychiatric drugs (for instance, corticosteroids)
can also increase the risk of seizures. Therefore, great cau-
tion must be exercised if bupropion is combined with any
of these drugs, especially if the dose of bupropion is high.
Make sure you check with your pharmacist or druggist
about drug interactions if you are taking any other medi-
cation along with bupropion.

There are several other kinds of drug interactions you
need to consider if you are taking bupropion:

¢ Barbiturates can cause the level of bupropion in the
blood to fall. This could make the bupropion ineffec-
tive.

Phenytoin (Dilantin) can also cause bupropion levels
to fall, thus making the bupropion less effective. How-
ever, phenytoin is most often prescribed for epilepsy,
and so patients taking phenytoin are not likely to re-
ceive bupropion.

Cimetidine (Tagamet) may increase bupropion levels
in the blood. This can increase the likelihood of side
effects or toxic effects, including seizures.

Bupropion must not be combined with the MAOIs be-
cause of the risk of a hypertensive crisis.

FEELING GOOD 611

¢ L-dopa increases the side effects of bupropion; caution
is required when these drugs are combined.

Venlafaxine (Effexor)

This is a relatively new antidepressant that is in a distinct
class from other antidepressant medications. Released in
1994, it is called a ‘‘dual uptake inhibitor’ or ‘“‘mixed up-
take inhibitor.’’ This has a very simple meaning. It leads
to increases in two types of chemical messengers (also
called neurotransmitters) in the brain—serotonin and nor-
epinephrine—by blocking the pumps that transport them
back into the presynaptic nerves after they are released into
the synapses.

As you will recall from Chapter 17, this capacity to in-
crease levels of two different types of chemical messengers
is not new. Many of the older and cheaper tricyclic anti-
depressants, such as Elavil (amitriptyline) also do this. The
more important difference with venlafaxine is that it has
fewer side effects because it does not stimulate the hista-
minic, alpha-adrenergic, and muscarinic brain receptors that
cause tiredness, dizziness, dry mouth, and so forth. How-
ever, as you will see below, venlafaxine has quite a number
of side effects of its own. Some of these, such as nausea,
insomnia, and sexual difficulties, are similar to the SSRI
antidepressants, and some (such as tiredness) are similar to
the tricyclic antidepressants.

It has been claimed that the onset of action may be faster
with venlafaxine because of its dual effects on serotonin
and norepinephrine receptors. This does not seem likely,
because the older tricyclic antidepressants also have dual
effects on serotonin and norepinephrine receptors in the
brain, but do not have rapid antidepressant effects. Research
iS now in progress to try to determine whether venlafaxine
really does work any more rapidly.

Although a faster-acting antidepressant would represent
an important breakthrough, we should probably not become

612 David D. Burns, M.D.

too optimistic about this. Clarms about the superior prop-
erties of new antidepressants have often not been substan-
tiated by careful, systematic, independent research after the
drugs have been available on the market for a period of
time. In addition, you will see below that venlafaxine must
be started at low doses and increased very slowly to prevent
side effects from developing. For most patients, this will
prevent the drug from having any rapid antidepressant ef-
fects.

Studies are in progress to examine the larger question of
whether drugs with dual action have stronger antidepressant
effects than SSRIs for certain types of patients, especially
severely depressed patients who are hospitalized. This is
important because the SSRIs (such as Prozac) which are
now so popular have not been particularly effective for
these patients. In one study, venlafaxine was more effective
than Prozac in the treatment of inpatients with ‘‘melan-
cholic’’ depression. ‘‘Melancholic’’ depression refers to a
more severe depression with many organic features, such
as waking up too early and a loss of appetite and sexual
drive. Individuals with melancholic depressions may also
have anhedonia along with feelings of guilt that can become
extreme or even delusional. Anhedonia refers to a severe
loss of the capacity to experience pleasure or satisfaction.

Like all antidepressants, venlafaxine is beginning to be
used for a number of other disorders as well. These include
chronic pain disorder as well as adult attention deficit dis-
order (ADD). Remember that all, or nearly all, antidepres-
sants have been used for a great variety of disorders, so it
is not likely that the effects of venlafaxine are superior for
chronic pain or for ADD.

Doses of Venlafaxine. Some experts recommend start-
ing venlafaxine at 18.75 mg twice per day, which is only
half the starting dose recommended by the manufacturer,
in order to minimize the likelihood that nausea will de-
velop.’ Then the daily dose can be slowly increased by

FEELING GOOD 613

37.5 mg every third day until a total dose of 150 mg per
day or above is reached. Most patients respond to a total
dose of 75 mg to 225 mg per day. Higher doses tend to be
more effective, but they are associated with more side ef-
fects.

Earlier when discussing SSRIs, we talked about the half-
life of drugs—this is the time required by the body to elim-
inate one half of the drug in your body. Venlafaxine has a
short half-life—meaning that it leaves your body in a mat-
ter of hours. Therefore, you must take the medication two
or three times per day to maintain an adequate level in your
bloodstream.

The manufacturer has recently marketed an extended
(slow) release version of venlafaxine (called Effexor XR)
that you need to take only once per day, which is more
convenient. As you can see in Table 20-1 on page 521, the
extended release capsules appear to be more costly, but this
is really an illusion. For example, you can see in the table
that the average wholesale price of a hundred of the 75 mg
capsule of Effexor is $118.66, whereas the price of a hun-
dred of the 75 mg extended-release capsules is $217.14, or
almost twice as much. When I first saw these figures, I
naturally concluded that the extended-release capsules were
twice as expensive as the regular pills.

But let’s see what happens in a real-life situation. Sup-
pose your dose is 75 mg per day. You could take either
one of the regular 37.5 mg pills in the morning and a sec-
ond 37.5 mg pill in the evening, for a total cost of $2.17
per day, or one of the 75 mg extended-release pills once
per day. As noted above, the cost of the 75 mg extended-
release pills will also be $2.17 per day. Either way, Effexor
is very expensive, since the daily dose may be as high as
375 mg per day. The high price is especially striking when
you compare the cost of Effexor with the cost of many of
the generic tricyclic antidepressants that are just as effective
and available for less than ten cents per day.

As with any antidepressant, it is best to taper off venla-

614 David D. Burns, M.D.

faxine slowly. At least two weeks are recommended, and
some patients may require as much as four weeks.

Side Effects of Venlafaxine. The side effects of venla-
faxine are listed in Table 20-11 on pages 608-609. As you
can see, they are similar to the SSRI compounds described
above. The most common side effects of venlafaxine are
nausea, headache, sleepiness, insomnia, abnormal dreams,
sweating, nervousness, and tremor. Venlafaxine can also
cause the same types of sexual difficulties as the SSRIs,
including a loss of interest in sex and difficulties achieving
orgasm. These sexual side effects tend to be quite common,
just as with the SSRIs. In spite of the claim that venlafaxine
has fewer side effects than the older tricyclic antidepres-
sants, this drug can nevertheless cause dry mouth and diz-
ziness in some patients. The dizziness is particularly likely
if you go off the drug too quickly.

One distinct type of side effect seen with venlafaxine is
an increase in blood pressure. However, the blood-pressure
increases are typically seen only at higher doses (225 mg
per day or above). Nevertheless, if you have problems with
your blood pressure, you and your doctor should monitor
your blood pressure carefully, and this drug may not be a
good choice for you. At doses less than 200 mg per day,
the likelihood of an increase in blood pressure is only about
5 percent. The probability increases to 10 percent or 15
percent at doses greater than 300 mg per day. Blood-
pressure increases of 20 to 30 mm of mercury have been
observed, for example.

Drug Interactions for Venlafaxine. Because venlafax-
ine is relatively new, information about its interactions with
other drugs is still relatively limited. Venlafaxine appears
to be less likely to interact in adverse ways with other med-
ications you are taking. Several drugs may cause blood lev-
els of venlafaxine to increase, and so lower doses of
venlafaxine may be needed. These include:

FEELING GOOD 615

* some tricyclic antidepressants;
¢ the SSRI antidepressants;
* cimetidine (Tagamet).

Venlafaxine may cause the blood levels of several of the
major tranquilizers to increase. These include trifluopera-
zine (Stelazine), haloperidol (Haldol), and risperidone (Ris-
perdal), and so lower doses of these drugs may be needed.
In theory, these drugs could also cause blood levels of Ven-
lafaxine to increase.

Venlafaxine must not be combined with MAOI antide-
pressants because of the danger of the serotonin syndrome
(hyperpyretic crisis) described on page 576. Remember that
it takes up to two weeks for the effects of an MAOIT to clear
out of your body, so a two-week drug-free period will be
required if you stop taking an MAOI and then start taking
venlafaxine. In contrast, if you go off venlafaxine and then
start taking an MAOI, a one-week drug-free period should
be sufficient, because venlafaxine leaves the body fairly
rapidly.

Mirtazapine (Remeron)

Mirtazapine (Remeron) was released in the United States
in 1996. It also enhances both norepinephrine and serotonin
activity, but through a different mechanism from venlafax-
ine. Premarketing studies suggest that mirtazapine may be
effective for mildly depressed outpatients and for more se-
verely depressed inpatients as well. It may also be partic-
ularly helpful for depressed patients who are very anxious
or nervous.

Doses of Mirtazapine. The dose range for mirtazapine
is 15 to 45 mg per day. Most physicians will prescribe a
smaller amount at first (7.5 mg per day) and then slowly
increase the dose. Because mirtazapine causes sleepiness in

616 David D. Burns, M.D.

more than 50 percent of the people who take it, it can be
given once a day at bedtime, usually in doses of 15 to 45
mg per day. Some physicians report that mirtazapine is less
likely to cause less sleepiness when the dose is increased.
This is the opposite of what you might expect intuitively.
It is because the drug may have some stimulating effects
at the higher doses. We will have to wait until there is more
clinical experience with this drug to see if this is really true.

Side Effects of Mirtazapine. The side effects of mirta-
zapine are listed in Table 20-11 on pages 608-609. You
can see that it blocks the histaminic, alpha-adrenergic, and
muscarinic receptors in much the same way that the older
tricyclic antidepressants do. Therefore, the side effect pro-
file of mirtazapine is very similar to the tricyclics, espe-
cially amitriptyline, clomipramine, doxepin, imipramine
and trimipramine (see Table 20-2). The more common side
effects include tiredness (54 percent of patients) noted
above, increased appetite (17 percent), weight gain (12 per-
cent), dry mouth (25 percent), constipation (13 percent),
and dizziness (7 percent). Keep in mind that these figures
are somewhat inflated because they do not take into account
the placebo effect. For example, 2 percent of patients on
placebo also report weight gain, and so the true incidence
of weight gain that can be attributed to the mirtazepine
would be 12 percent minus 2 percent, or 10 percent. Mir-
tazepine is not likely to cause the stomach upset, insomnia,
nervousness, and sexual problems commonly seen with the
SSRIs such as Prozac.

Mirtazapine has some unique adverse effects not shared
with other antidepressants. It can, in rare cases, cause your
white blood cell count to fall. Because these cells are in-
volved in fighting off infections, this could make you more
vulnerable to a variety of infections. If you develop a fever
while taking this drug, make sure you contact your physi-
cian immediately so that he or she can obtain a complete
blood count. Mirtazapine can sometimes cause an increase
in levels of blood fats such as cholesterol and triglycerides.

FEELING GOOD 617

This could be a problem if you are overweight or have a
heart condition or if your cholesterol and triglycerides lev-
els are already elevated.

Drug Interactions for Mirtazapine. Because mirtaza-
pine is relatively new, very little information about its
drug interactions is available. It must not be combined
with the MAOI antidepressants because of the risk of the
serotonin syndrome (hyperpyretic crisis). Because it can
be quite sedating, it will enhance the effects of other sed-
ative drugs. These include alcohol, major and minor tran-
quilizers, sleeping pills, some antihistamines, barbiturates,
many other antidepressants, and the antianxiety drug bus-
pirone (BuSpar). The increased sleepiness you experience
when these substances are combined with mirtazapine
could lead to difficulties with coordination and concentra-
tion. This might be hazardous when driving or operating
dangerous machinery.

Mood Stabilizers
Lithium

In 1949, an Australian psychiatrist named John Cade ob-
served that lithium, a common salt, caused sedation in
guinea pigs. He gave lithium to a patient with manic symp-
toms and observed dramatic calming effects. Tests of the
effects of lithium in other manic patients yielded similar
results. Since that time, lithium has slowly gained popular-
ity throughout the world. It has been used successfully in
the treatment of a number of conditions, including:

¢ Acute manic states. Although lithium is used to treat
patients with severe mania, they will usually be treated
with more potent, faster-acting drugs at the same time
until the severe symptoms of mania have subsided.
These other drugs include the antipsychotics (also

618 David D. Burns, M.D.

known as major tranquilizers or neuroleptics) such as
chlorpromazine (Thorazine), as well as benzodiaze-
pines (also called ‘‘minor tranquilizers’’) such as clon-
azepam (Klonopin) or lorazepam (Ativan). These
additional drugs are used until the mania has been
brought under control. Once the severe manic symp-
toms subside, the other drugs are discontinued and the
patient continues taking the lithium to prevent future
mood swings.

Recurrent manic and depressive mood swings in indi-
viduals with bipolar manic-depressive illness. Lithium
has significant preventative effects, so that the likeli-
hood of future manic episodes is reduced.

Single episodes of depression. Lithium is sometimes
added in smaller doses to an antidepressant drug that
is not working in order to try to improve its effective-
ness. I will describe this and other augmentation strat-
egies later in the chapter.

Recurrent episodes of depression in patients without
manic mood swings. Lithium maintenance may help to
prevent recurrences of depression following recovery.
Some studies indicate that the preventative effects of
long-term lithium treatment may be similar to the ef-
fects of long-term treatment with an antidepressant
such as imipramine. However, this preventative effect
on depression may not work for all patients. Lithium
is probably more likely to prevent depressions in pa-
tients with a strong family history of bipolar (manic-
depressive) illness.

Individuals with episodic anger and irritability or out-
bursts of violent rage.

Individuals with schizophrenia. Lithium can be com-
bined with an antipsychotic medication, and the com-
bination may be more effective than the antipsychotic
medication alone. The improvement seems to occur in
schizophrenic patients who also experience mania or

FEELING GOOD 619

depression and in schizophrenic patients without any
symptoms of mania or depression.

You should keep in mind that in all of these conditions,
lithium is sometimes helpful but rarely ever curative. Like
most medications, it is a valuable tool but not a panacea.

As noted above, manic-depressive illness is sometimes
also called bipolar illness. “‘Bipolar’’ simply means ‘‘two
poles.’’ Patients with bipolar illness experience uncontrol-
lable euphoric mood swings that often alternate with severe
depressions. The manic phase is characterized by an ex-
tremely ecstatic, euphoric mood, inappropriate degrees of
self-confidence and grandiosity, constant talking, nonstop
hyperactivity, increased sexual activity, a decreased need
for sleep, heightened irritability and aggressiveness, and
self-destructive impulsive behavior such as reckless spend-
ing binges. This extraordinary disease usually develops into
a chronic pattern of uncontrollable highs and lows that can
come on unexpectedly throughout your life, so your phy-
sician may recommend that you continue to take lithium
(or another mood stabilizing drug) for the rest of your life.

If you have experienced abnormal mood elevations along
with your depression, your physician will almost definitely
prescribe lithium or another comparable mood-stabilizing
drug. Some studies suggest that 1f you are depressed and
have a definite family history of mania, you might benefit
from lithium even if you have never been manic yourself.
However, most physicians would first prescribe a standard
antidepressant and observe you carefully. Although anti-
depressants do not usually cause euphoria or mania in peo-
ple with depression, they can occasionally have this effect
in individuals with bipolar manic-depressive illness. The
mania can begin as quickly as twenty-four to forty-eight
hours after starting the antidepressant.

In my clinical practice, the development of a sudden and
dangerous manic episode after starting an antidepressant
has been quite rare, even in patients with bipolar illness.
Nevertheless, if you have a personal or family history of

620 David D. Burns, M.D.

mania, it is conceivable that you could experience this side
effect. Be sure to tell your doctor about this so you can
receive careful follow-up after starting an antidepressant.
Your family, too, should be alerted to this possibility. Fam-
ily members are often aware of the development of a manic
episode before the patient realizes what is happening, and
can alert the doctor that a problem has developed. This is
because the distinction between normal happiness and the
beginning of the mania may be unclear to the patient. Fur-
thermore, mania feels so good at first that you may not
recognize it as a dangerous side effect of the medication
you are taking.

Doses of Lithium. As you will see in Table 20-1, lith-
ium comes in 300-mg dosages, and normally three to six
pills per day in divided doses are required. Your physician
will guide you. Initially, you may take the lithium three or
four times per day. Once you are stabilized on lithium, you
may be able to take half your total daily dose in the morn-
ing and half before you go to bed. This twice-a-day sched-
ule will be more convenient.

Sustained-release capsules containing 450 mg are also
available. Because these drugs are released more slowly in
the stomach and gastrointestinal tract, they may cause fewer
side effects and they are more convenient because you
don’t have to take them so often. However, their increased
cost, as compared with generic lithium, may not justify tak-
ing them. Furthermore, many patients have reported that
the side effects of the inexpensive, generic brands of lith-
ium are no different from the more expensive slow-release
brands.

Like the other drugs used for treating mood disorders,
lithium usually requires between two and three weeks to
become effective. When taken for a prolonged period of
time, its clinical effectiveness seems to increase. Thus, if
you take it for a period of years, it may help you more and
more.

Unfortunately, there appears to be a group of individuals

FEELING GOOD 621

who do well on lithium, stop taking it, become symptomatic
again, and then find that the lithium is less effective when
they start taking it again. This is one reason why you should
not stop taking lithium, or any other medication, without
first consulting with your doctor.

Lithium Blood Testing. Too much lithium in your blood
can cause dangerous side effects. In contrast, if your blood
level is too low, the drug will not help you. Because there
is a narrow “‘window’’ of effectiveness of lithium, blood-
level testing is required to make sure that your dose is nei-
ther too high nor too low. Initially, your doctor will order
more frequent blood tests so that she or he can determine
what the proper dose should be. Later on, when your dose
and symptoms have stabilized, you will not need the blood
tests nearly as frequently.

If you are an outpatient and you are not experiencing
severe mania, your doctor may order lithium blood tests
once or twice a week for the first couple weeks, then once
a month. Eventually, blood tests every three months may
be sufficient.

If you are being treated for a more severe episode of
mania, more frequent blood tests will be required. This is
because higher blood levels of lithium are usually needed
to control the severe symptoms. In addition, your body
tends to get rid of lithium more rapidly during an episode
of mania, so larger doses may be needed to maintain the
proper blood level. As noted above, during a manic episode
your doctor will almost definitely want to combine lithium
with more potent drugs for the first few weeks until your
symptoms have subsided.

Your blood must be drawn eight to twelve hours after
your last lithium pill. The best time for a blood test is first
thing in the morning. If you forget and take your lithium
pill the morning of a blood test, don’t take the test! Try
again another day. Otherwise, the results will be misleading
to your doctor.

Body size, kidney function, weather conditions, and

622 David D. Burns, M.D.

other factors can influence your lithium dose requirement,
so blood tests should be performed on a regular basis when
you are on lithium maintenance. Your doctor will probably
try to maintain your blood level at somewhere between 0.6
and 1.2 mg per cc, but this will vary with your symptom
level. During an episode of acute mania, your doctor will
probably want to keep your blood level closer to the top of
the therapeutic range. Some doctors feel that levels as low
as 0.4 to 0.6 mg per cc can be effective to help prevent an
episode of depression or mania when you are feeling good.

Patients with chronic irritability and anger may also re-
spond to lithium at these lower blood levels, even if they
don’t suffer from clear symptoms of manic-depressive ill-
ness. The advantage of these lower levels is that there are
fewer side effects.

Other Medical Tests. Prior to treatment, the doctor will
evaluate your medical condition and order a series of blood
tests and a urinalysis. These blood tests will usually include
a complete blood count, tests of thyroid and kidney func-
tion, electrolytes, and blood sugar. Your thyroid function-
ing should be tested at six-month or yearly intervals while
you are taking lithium because some patients on lithium
develop goiters (a swelling or lump on the thyroid gland)
or underactive thyroid glands. Your kidney function must
also be evaluated from time to time because of kidney ab-
normalities reported in some patients taking lithium. Your
doctor may order an electrocardiogram (ECG) before you
start taking the lithium, especially if you are over forty or
if you have a history of heart problems. Your doctor will
also need to know about any other drugs you may be tak-
ing, because some of them may cause elevations in your
blood lithium level. These include certain diuretics as well
as some anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen, na-
proxen, and indomethacin. You will learn below that some
drugs can have the opposite effect of causing your lithium
level to fall.

FEELING GOOD 623

Side Effects of Lithiurn. The side effects of lithium are
listed in Table 20-12 on pages 624—625 and compared with
the side effects of two other mood stabilizers I will discuss
below. As you can see, lithium tends to have many side
effects. Most of them are mildly uncomfortable but not se-
rious.

Starting with the effects on the muscles and nervous sys-
tem first, you will see that lithium can cause a fine tremor
of the hands and fingers in 30 percent to 50 percent of
patients. This tremor will be present when your hands are
resting and often worsens when you do something pur-
poseful with your hands. For example, the tremor can make
it more difficult to hold a cup of coffee or to write clearly.
The severity of the tremor is related to the dose and may
be more severe when lithium is prescribed along with one
of the tricyclic antidepressants, which can also cause
tremor.

This tremor is one of the major reasons that some pa-
tients stop taking their lithium. An antitremor drug called
propranolol (Inderal) can be given if the tremor is espe-
cially severe and troublesome, but it is my policy to avoid
prescribing an additional drug if possible. A reduction in
dose can also help.

If your doctor does prescribe propranolol, the usual dose
to reduce a lithium tremor is 20 to 160 mg per day, given
in divided doses. It is best to start with small doses and
increase gradually. The smallest effective dose is best. This
is because propranolol can have other effects, including a
slowing of the heart, a drop in blood pressure, weakness
and fatigue, mental confusion, and upset stomach. Propran-
olol can also cause breathing difficulties and must not be
given to patients with asthma. It is also contraindicated for
patients with Raynaud’s disease. Metoprolol (25 to 50 mg)
or nadolol (20 to 40 mg), drugs similar to propranolol, have
also been used to treat lithium tremor.

Lithium may cause tiredness and fatigue initially, but
these effects will generally disappear with time. Some pa-
tients complain of mental slowing or forgetfulness, partic-

\ CHAVIS) euoutoy
IMeInIpyue Jo uoTadsas

oyelidoiddeut Jo awiospuds

yynour Arp
UOTJOUNJ JOAT[ Ul Somtpeutouqe
yorwio3s josdn

SSoUyBOM
ssoupost}
UOTeUIPIOOS YM sua,qoid
SSOUIZZIpP

auidazvulpgavo

stqqeotoued

UOTDUNJ JOA Ul SomypeuLlouqe
ules JYsIOM

yoeuols yasdn

ssouyeom

ssoupaly

UOHeUIpIOOS YUM suta[qoid
JOWION

pilav D1I01dVA

Aguoyoyynsul
Jeual (ppm ATyensn)
0} Surpedgy ‘stiyydou jeynssoqui
(issy}
pue uoTjeULIN dAISSOOX9)
snpidisur sajaqvip otuesomdou

voy leip
ules 14SIOM
yorwois yosdn

sso] ArouIOUI

SUITINp JO SUIMOTS JeIUSU
ssoupaly

UOTICUIPIOOS YUM suId[qosd
Iowan

uInIY JI]

sAaupry

pei,
[VuIpsSa}UIO.Ses
pue yorurojs

w1a3SAS
SNOAJIaN pue saposnyA

K108a]D)

eSIOZIIIGEIG POOW! OU} JO S}DOJF OPIS “Z1-0% BIGeL

(pL pue ¢y) souou0OY
PIOIAU} JO S[SAd__poseaioap

(arel) oIn[iej] MOITeU ouO0g
sura|qoid
SUIPSI[q YUM Sjofaie[d pasevaioap

suUIyIAUT WesYy TeulJoUge

ysel

Le eel iaal
ae 2 shai pl om ahem ane pine nig em 0 CN de mshi edi tlle dealt ord nin heim ta tere

SosuRvYO [eN.IsUoU
sulatqoid Suipsscyq

YIM sjzopoeld pasearioap

SSO] IJTeYy
ysel

‘popusuTUIOdaI ATYSIY a7e SaoUdTIAZOI
JUD][IOXA ISoY], , ,"SIIDY 1S. Sénaq JidosjoyoXsg pue ,ASojoovuavydoyosg jvoiunyD fo jonuvp sy) Woy wed ut poureigo sem 9[qQeI SIM UT UONeULIOJUT,

wisiprorAyj0dAy

yunos
[[99 poolq aYyM poseosoul

sosueys OOF

aude
SSO] Jey
ysel

euciotiaintd os sa biniabbeetr alee shite state

jeuowW.A0F]

pool
y1Vayy

uLYS

626 David D. Burns, M.D.

ularly younger individuals. The forgetfulness has been
confirmed by memory testing. Other antidepressants that
have anticholinergic properties, such as Elavil, can also
cause forgetfulness. Complaints about these mental changes
are very common and cause many patients to stop taking
their lithium. Memory difficulties seem to be more pro-
nounced at higher lithium blood levels, as might be ex-
pected, and often improve when the dose is reduced.

Along the same lines, some patients complain of sub-
stantial weakness and fatigue. These symptoms often indi-
cate an excessive lithium level, and a dose reduction may
be indicated. Extreme sleepiness with mental confusion, a
loss of coordination, or slurred speech suggests a danger-
ously elevated lithium level. Discontinue the drug and seek
immediate medical attention if such symptoms appear.

Some patients express the fear that they may lose their
creativity when they start taking lithium. This is especially
of concern for artists and writers who have used their highs
and lows as a source of painful inspiration for creative ex-
pression. Indeed, many well-known painters and poets
through the centuries suffered from manic-depressive ill-
ness, and their moods were clearly reflected in their work.
However, three quarters of patients on lithium report that
it does not seem to reduce their creativity, and in some
cases their creativity increases.’

Turning next to the digestive system, lithium can cause
an upset stomach or diarrhea that 1s most troublesome dur-
ing the first few days of treatment. These side effects will
usually disappear with time. It may help to take the lithium
with food or to take it in three or four divided doses
throughout the day, so that your stomach isn’t hit with a
large dose all at once. It can also help to increase the dose
of lithium more slowly. In rare cases lithtum can cause
vomiting as well as diarrhea, and your body may become
dehydrated because of all the fluid loss. This can make your
blood levels of lithium higher, and so the drug becomes
more toxic. This, in turn, can cause more nausea and di-
arrhea, creating a vicious cycle. Medical attention may be

FEELING GOOD 627

needed to make sure you are adequately hydrated until the
episode has passed.

Unfortunately, many patients on lithium experience
weight gain; this is another common reason patients stop
taking the drug. Dr. Alan Schatzberg’ has suggested that
this problem will be greater if you are already overweight.
The weight gain results from the stimulation of your ap-
petite. This is often very difficult to control. Obviously, if
you exercise more and eat less, the weight gain can be
prevented or reversed, but this 1s often much easier said
than done! If the weight gain is excessive or troublesome,
switching to an alternative mood stabilizer, such as carba-
mazepine, may be helpful.

Increased thirst and frequent urination can also occur
when taking lithium. In some cases, patients develop in-
tense thirst from urination that is so frequent and volumi-
nous that the lithium must be stopped. This condition,
known as nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDJ), results
from the effects of lithium on the kidneys. It is usually
reversible when the lithium is stopped. In some cases, add-
ing certain types of diuretics can also help. However, care-
ful lithium monitoring must be performed, because these
diuretics can cause increases in plasma lithium levels.
Milder forms of increased urination probably occur in one
half to three quarters of patients who take lithium.

Lithium can cause a form of kidney damage called ‘‘in-
terstitial nephritis.’’ This term simply means inflammation
or irritation of the tissue. When first reported, psychiatrists
were quite alarmed about this complication. Subsequent ex-
perience has indicated that although the problem may occur
in 5 percent or more of patients who take lithium for many
years, the degree of kidney impairment is usually mild.
Your doctor will nevertheless want to monitor your kidney
function periodically while you are on lithium. She or he
will order two blood tests called the creatinine test and the
blood urea nitrogen (BUN) test once or twice a year. These
tests can be performed at the same time you are having
your usual lithium blood test taken. If the tests indicate a

628 David D. Burns, M.D.

change in kidney function, your doctor may request a con-
sultation with a urologist and order a twenty-four hour cre-
atinine clearance test. This is a more accurate test of kidney
function and will involve saving all your urine for twenty-
four hours in a special bottle that the clinical laboratory
will give you. The results will help your doctor evaluate
whether it will be safe for you to continue taking lithium.

An occasional patient will develop a rash, and patients
with psoriasis who take lithium will often experience a
flare-up of the condition. This may require consultation
with a dermatologist, switching to another brand of lithium,
going off lithium temporarily, or switching to one of the
other mood-stabilizing medications. Acne may also worsen
during lithium treatment. This can be treated with antibi-
Otics or retinoic acid, but in some cases the lithium may
have to be stopped. Some patients complain of hair loss,
but the hair usually grows back, whether or not the patient
continues taking lithium. It is interesting to note that
lithium-related hair loss occurs primarily in women, and
hair can disappear from anywhere on the body. Hair loss
is sometimes a sign of hypothyroidism (see below) and so
your doctor may order a thyroid blood test if the problem
persists.

Lithium can cause a variety of changes in the electro-
cardiogram (ECG), but these are usually not serious. Older
patients, as well as those with heart disease, should have
an ECG taken before they start on lithium, as noted above.
The ECG can be repeated once you are stabilized on lithium
to see if there are any changes in heart rhythm that might
be a cause for concern.

You can see in Table 20—12 that lithium can also cause
an increase in your levels of white blood cells. These are
the cells that normally fight infection. A normal white
blood cell count is in the range of 6,000 to 10,000. The
white blood cell count in patients on lithium typically in-
creases to the range of 12,000 to 15,000 per cc, elevations
that are not considered dangerous. However, if you go to
a physician because you are ill, make sure you remind him

FEELING GOOD 629

or her that you are taking lithium and that the lithium may
cause a false elevation of your white blood cell count. Oth-
erwise, your doctor may falsely conclude that you have a
serious infection, even if you actually do not.

Finally, lithium can affect thyroid functioning in as many
as 20 percent of patients. As noted above, one common
effect is an increase in the size of the thyroid gland (called
a ““goiter’’) without any changes in thyroid function. Other
patients develop increases in the levels of thyroid stimulat-
ing hormone (TSH) in the blood. This indicates that the
body is trying harder to stimulate the thyroid gland. As
many as 5 percent of patients on lithium will develop hy-
pothyroidism, and this may require treatment with thyrox-
ine (0.05 to 0.2 mg per day), a thyroid hormone
replacement. Hypothyroidism is more common in women
than in men.

Lithium Drug Interactions. As you can see in Table 20-
13 on pages 630-631, lithium interacts with many other
drugs. Make sure you review this list with your physician
if you are taking other medications at the same time you
are taking lithium.

The drugs near the top of the table may cause lithium
levels in the blood to increase. This can lead to more side
effects, including lithium toxicity. The dose of lithium may
need to be reduced to maintain blood levels in the proper
range. These drugs that cause increased lithium levels in-
clude several drugs commonly used in the treatment of high
blood pressure, such as the so-called ACE inhibitors, the
calcium channel blocking agents, and methyldopa (AI-
domet). The calcium channel blocking agents 1n particular
may lead to greater lithium toxicity, with symptoms such
as tremor, loss of coordination, nausea and vomiting, di-
arrhea, and ringing in the ears. Caution is required if you
combine lithium with any of these drugs.

Many common non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, and other trade
names) can also cause lithium levels to increase. Several

(ulpljozejng)
auozeinqjAuayd
(aQuapta) Weotxolld .
(SIpnig) usyo1do10y
(UIDOpUuy)
UIOVYJOWIOPUI
(TIAPY) wojosdnq! -
(uaTey[O A.) DBUSJOPOIP

ssnip AIOeUIWUe UI
-ue [eplolajys-uou
Qowoply) edopjAyioul
(xolouvs) [OpUIzew

ISVIIIUT OF SPIIJFY IIXOY, UNIT IO sjaaa] UMIUWWT poolg asnes Yo AA Ssnig

JOIP 1]BS- MOT
QUTLeIOY

(opizejoeply
UI) qUOJOeTOUONIdS .
(JOWepIA]) OpHOopIuUe «

(addi Suraes
-Wuinissejod) soaimip

(THosTy)
OPIZERPOIOTYOOIpAY «

({HInIq)
OPIZeIMIOIOTYO «

_ (sapizeryy) soneinip

(XISb’]) OpIWUasOINJ «
(uLIDapq)

ploe oIuAIOKYyIO «

(ad4} dooy) soremmnip

(undosy) [tuede1adA «
(vIpIes0lg)

ouIdipayiu .

(WIOZIpIeD) WOZeN[IP «

SIDYOOTG
jouueYyo WINTOTeO

({ASe]q)
S[OZEPIUOIJOW «

sjuase [esunjnue

(auayedaq)
plow SIOId]eA
(uIjUeTIC) uIOjAUSYd .
(J0yo139 1)
ouidozeureqieo .

sjues[nAUuooue

(uIDAWIOIYSV)
DUT[OADVIIO} «

(WIDIqoI])
ujoAmouTjoeds «

| (uadiuuig) ulproidure .

sonoiqnue
joyooye

(soe Vy) [Hdrues
(udnooy) [udeumb
({HISO A,

‘THATuLg) [doutst
({udouoy]) [ldoursoy
(99}0SeA,) [LIdeyeus
(uajodes) [udores
(uIsud}O7J) [udezeuaq

sTonqraul
(SWIAZUD SUTLIOAUOD
-UISUD}OISUB) FDV

‘suoHoRIOUI Snip Aue ore olay) JI ysIoeuIeyd pue 10}0p MOA Yse ‘UONeIIPSU 19Y}0
Aue pue winiyyy Suryey ore nod Jy ‘APUenbaa INO SoWOD SUOTIOVIOUI BhIP NOG UONULIOJUI MoU f9ATSNeYXd JOU SI ISI] SIU], :9J0N

esuonoeieu| Brug wniuyy “€1-0% e1GeL

‘suOTILOIpoU oOLNeIYyoAsd
UO UONVULIOJUT JO JDINOS JUWajjaoxe ue SI YOod STL ,,;C{IZ—-E€1Z ‘dd ‘syon7 ysp.J s&naq DidosjoydAS J WOT] POUTeIGO SLM JIQU} SIY) UI UONRULIOJUI oUIOS,

(are1 oyinb)

(THETSY) SUIZepLOM) «

IOWA JO pooyIeyl] posvosoul syuessoldopyue o1[9Aouy | (SIAN) owOIpUAS JueUsTTeUr (oper) jopuadore
suIyIAYI Weoy yeuLouge | ([LeIsIA ‘xeIeyy) oUIZAxoIpAY ondajomeu jo pooylayy| ouresot ) ourzeusoadio 5 .
SUIMO|S WeeYy (uIxoue’] dy) BsvaIOUT IO AWOIXO} PEIONL) 90) Iq)

pue sumujAyI yesy jeulouqge ‘UISIPOISAI) SITRUSIP UINIYN] Poseaioul osneo APU sjuase onoyoAsdijue

SUOIPIVAIDIUT SHIG WHIT 1BYIO

(preyuorg) ourjAydooy} -
(aueIpNy) oulyjAydounue .
([HUSAOIg) JOIONGye -

(JOIPS|A]) DUOTOSIUpaId]AYIOUL «

von
(JOLIOD) suUOSTIODOIPAY «

Spoo} Ales
gyeUOGIeIG WINIpOS
SONAINIP STOUWISO

SPIO1O}SOITLIOS
(AJVJOSOYD “Epos ‘vo} ‘daJJoo UT) oUTATJeO

Sloe TI poyouolq
(XOUIvIC]) oprluielozejooR

ISBIIII([ 0} SIFY IXOL WNIQIT 10 SPaPaa'] wWNIYyWWT] poojg asned yA ssn1ig


632 David D. Burns, M.D.

antibiotics raise lithium levels, as does the common anti-
fungal agent metronidazole (Flagyl), which is often used to
treat vaginal infections. Several anticonvulsants are also
listed in the top portion of Table 20-13. If you are taking
any of these medications, you might need lower doses of
lithium.

If you have high blood pressure, you may also be treated
with a diuretic (or water pill). Some diuretics cause lithium
levels to increase.’The loop diuretics and potassium-saving
diuretics in Table 20-13 do not increase lithium levels as
much as the thiazide diuretics that are listed there. Not all
diuretics cause lithium levels to rise. For example, you can
see in Table 20-13 that osmotic diuretics, which work a
little differently from the others, can have the opposite ef-
fect of causing lithium levels to fall.

Your doctor may prescribe a low-salt diet if you have
high blood pressure. However, a low-salt diet can cause
lithium levels to rise. This is because your kidneys will
excrete less salt in an attempt to preserve it. Since lithium
is also a salt that is chemically very similar to table salt,
your kidney will also excrete less lithium. By the same
token, if you are sweating a great deal during the summer
months, this can have the same effect of depleting your
body of salt and causing your lithium levels to increase.
Once again, your kidneys will try to preserve salt and lith-
ium as well. Make sure you maintain an adequate intake of
salt to compensate for the salt you will lose if you are
sweating a great deal.

The opposite effect can also occur. You can also see in
Table 20-13 that if you eat too much salt, it can cause
lithium levels to fall. This is because your kidneys will
sense that there is too much salt in your blood and will try
to get rid of it. Your kidneys will excrete more lithium
along with the extra salt.

In contrast, the drugs listed in the middle of Table 20-
13 have the opposite effect of causing lithium levels in the
blood to fall. As a result, lithium can lose its effectiveness.
You can see that several drugs used in the treatment of

FEELING GOOD 633

asthma reduce serum lithium levels. Caffeine also has the
same effect, so if you are a heavy coffee drinker, you may
need to cut down on coffee or take higher doses of lithium.
Corticosteroids, which are used in many conditions includ-
ing poison ivy, can also cause lithium levels to fall. The
dose of lithium may need to be increased to maintain blood
levels in the proper range if you are taking any of these
drugs.

A number of other drug interactions are listed in Table
20-13. Psychiatrists used to think that the combination of
lithium with certain antipsychotic medications (especially
haloperidol) greatly increased the risk of a toxic effect
called NMS (neuroleptic malignant syndrome). NMS con-
sists of severe muscle rigidity and confusion along with
elevated temperature, profuse sweating, increases in blood
pressure, rapid heartbeat and breathing, trouble swallowing,
abnormal kidney and liver function, and other symptoms.
However, although any patient on antipsychotic drugs runs
a small risk of developing NMS, recent clinical experience
has indicated that the likelihood of NMS may be increased
only slightly when antipsychotics are combined with lith-
ium. Lithium is now often used in combination with anti-
psychotic drugs and may enhance their effects in the
treatment of schizophrenia, as described above.

As with most psychiatric drugs, pregnant women should
avoid lithium, if possible, because its use has been associ-
ated with birth defects involving the heart. This is not an
all-or-nothing issue, and the potential benefits must be
weighed against the potential hazards. The risk of a heart
defect known as Ebstein’s anomaly is twenty times greater
than normal in mothers who take lithium, but the likelihood
is still less than 1 percent. Other birth defects can also oc-
cur, especially when lithium is used during the first trimes-
ter of pregnancy. In addition, lithium (as well as some other
psychiatric drugs) is secreted in human milk and should be
avoided by nursing mothers. If lithium is needed, breast-
feeding should be avoided.

If you or your doctor have any questions about lithium

634 David D. Burns, M.D.

(as well as the other mood stabilizers described below), the
lithium information center at the Madison Institute of Med-
icine, Madison, Wisconsin, can often help.”

Valproic Acid

Valproic acid is usually used in the treatment of epilepsy
but was recently granted FDA approval for the treatment
of bipolar disorder, especially acute mania. You can see in
Table 20-1 on page 522 that this drug is prescribed in one
of two forms: valproic acid (Depakene) or the slightly more
expensive divalproex sodium form (Depakote). The two
forms are equally effective. Studies comparing valproic
acid with lithium indicate that the two drugs are compara-
bly effective and both appear to be twice as effective as a
placebo. Valproic acid, like lithium, also appears to be ef-
fective in preventing or reducing future manic episodes.
The drug may be especially effective in the treatment of
the rapid-cycling form of bipolar disorder. It can help pa-
tients who experience mania and depression at the same
time (so-called ‘‘mixed states’’), as well as patients who
experience the more common forms of bipolar disorder. It
is probably less effective in the prevention and treatment
of depression than in the prevention and treatment of mania.

Doses for Valproic Acid. It is best to start valproic acid
gradually, in order to minimize the side effects. The dose
on the first day might be 250 mg administered with a meal.
During the first week, the dosage can be gradually raised
up to 250 mg given three times a day. As with any medi-
cation, the dose you receive may be slightly different de-
pending on your size, gender, and clinical symptoms. For
example, a man who weighs 160 pounds might be started
on 500 mg twice a day.

During the second and third weeks, the dose may be
slowly increased further. Most patients end up with a total
daily dose in the range of 1,200 to 1,500 mg, given in

FEELING GOOD 635

divided doses (for example, 400 mg three times per day).
Individual doses can vary widely. Some patients respond to
as little as 750 mg per day and others need as much as
3,000 mg per day. As with any drug, doses outside the
normal range are occasionally needed.

Some improvement should be observed within two
weeks of attaining a therapeutic blood level. If you respond
to valproic acid, your doctor may suggest that you remain
on it for an extended period of time, just like lithium.

Blood Testing. Your doctor will order blood tests to ad-
just your dose of valproic acid. Initially your doctor may
order a blood test once a week until your dose and blood
level are stabilized. After that you will need a blood test
only every month or two.

The blood should be drawn approximately twelve hours
after your last dose, just like the lithium blood test. Most
patients take valproic acid in divided doses twice a day. If
so, the blood can be drawn in the morning, before you take
your first daily dose. Most physicians think that a blood
level of 50 to 100 micrograms per ml is therapeutic, but
others are comfortable with blood levels up to 125 mcg per
ml, especially if the patient is acutely manic. Of course,
more side effects are observed at the higher blood levels.

Prior to treatment, your doctor will probably order a
blood test to check your liver enzymes, a bleeding test, and
a complete blood count (which includes a platelet count).
These additional blood tests are performed because in rare
cases valproic acid can cause hepatitis (an inflammation of
the liver) as well as bleeding problems. From time to time
after you have been on valproic acid, your doctor will re-
peat these tests to make sure that no changes have occurred.
Many physicians feel that it is probably necessary to check
the blood count and liver enzymes only every six to twelve
months, especially if the patient has been educated to report
immediately any signs or symptoms that indicate a liver
inflammation, as described below. You should also tell your

636 David D. Burns, M.D.

doctor if you notice any excessive bleeding or easy bruis-
ing.

Temporary increases in liver enzymes have been reported
in as many as 15 percent to 20 percent of patients during
the first three months of treatment. In most cases, these
elevations are not considered serious. Nevertheless, if your
liver enzymes do change, your doctor will probably reduce
the dose of valproic acid and continue to monitor the liver
enzymes. Your doctor will also want you to be educated
about the symptoms of hepatitis so you can contact him or
her immediately if they develop. Jaundice is the classic
symptom. Jaundice is a condition in which your urine be-
comes dark and your skin and eyes become yellow in color.
In addition, your bowel movements become pale. When the
liver becomes inflamed, the pigment that normally causes
your bowel movements to become brown gets backed up
in your blood, staining your eyes, skin, and urine. Other
symptoms of hepatitis include fatigue, nausea, a loss of ap-
petite, tiredness, and weakness. Fortunately, hepatitis only
rarely complicates treatment with valproic acid and can
usually be treated successfully, especially if you notify your
physician right away.

Although the liver inflammation is nearly always mild,
it is important to watch carefully for these symptoms be-
cause they could, in theory, progress to fatal liver failure.
This complication has been observed in infants and is rarely
seen in adults. It usually occurs in individuals taking other
anticonvulsants at the same time. In fact, some experts as-
sert that it has not been seen in adults who take only one
anticonvulsant.’’

Side Effects of Valproic Acid. The side effects of val-
proic acid are listed in Table 20-12 on pages 624-625. On
the average, valproic acid is usually better tolerated by pa-
tients than lithium because it has fewer side effects. Sleep-
iness is a common side effect. Taking more of your daily
dose in the evening before you go to bed can often prevent
the sleepiness from being problematic. Valproic acid can

FEELING GOOD 637

also cause stomach upset which can take the form of nau-
sea, vomiting, cramping, or diarrhea. These effects on the
gastrointestinal tract are less common and can often be
helped by taking a drug like Pepcid twice a day. Drs. J. S.
Maxmen and N.G. Ward indicate that the frequency of
stomach upset is greater with valproic acid (15 percent to
20 percent) than with the enteric-coated divalproex sodium
(10 percent) tablets, and so a switch to divalproex sodium
may help if these symptoms are troublesome.'’

You can see in Table 20-12 that valproic acid can also
cause tremor. As with lithium, this effect can sometimes be
helped by reducing the dose or by adding one of the beta-
blocking drugs (see the discussion of lithium tremor above).
Other uncommon side effects include a loss of coordination
and weight gain.

Valproic acid can cause a rash in 5 percent of patients,
much like the two other mood stabilizers listed in Table
20-12. Some patients have also reported hair loss, and if
this develops you should discontinue the drug (after dis-
cussing this with your doctor, or course) because it can take
several months for the hair to grow back. The hair loss is
thought to be due to the fact that valproic acid can interfere
with the metabolism of zinc and selenium. Vitamin supple-
ments containing these two metals can be taken to try to
prevent this. Dr. Alan Schatzberg and his colleagues rec-
ommend the vitamin supplement Centrum Silver for this
purpose.

As many as 20 percent of women have reported men-
strual irregularities while on valproic acid. This may be due
to the fact that valproic acid can cause blood levels of the
relevant hormones to fall, resulting in impaired ovulation.
Paradoxically, valproic acid can also cause certain oral con-
traceptives to fail, so in theory you could become pregnant.
Make sure you discuss this possibility with your doctor if
you are taking oral contraceptives.

Valproic acid, like a number of other anticonvulsants,
may lead to birth defects and should usually not be taken
during pregnancy. The deformities include a cleft lip, clot-

638 David D. Burns, M.D.

ting abnormalities, spina bifida, and others. During the lat-
ter phases of pregnancy (the third trimester) valproic acid
can cause liver toxicity for the developing baby, especially
when blood levels are greater than 60 mcg per ml. Make
sure you inform your doctor if you think there is any chance
you could become pregnant while taking this drug.

Special precautions are indicated for women under
twenty who receive long-term treatment with valproic acid.
Some studies have suggested that they may be more likely
to develop polycystic ovaries and increased levels of male
sex hormones, but the actual incidence of this complication
is not known."”

Drug Interactions for Valproic Acid. Valproic acid does
not seem to have as many drug interactions as lithium or
carbamazepine. Because valproic acid can cause sleepiness,
it can enhance the effects of other sedative drugs such as
alcohol, major and minor tranquilizers, barbiturates, or
sleeping pills. These combinations could be hazardous, es-
pecially when driving or operating dangerous machinery.
In addition, valproic acid can cause substantial increases in
blood levels of barbiturates, causing extreme sedation or
intoxication. Valproic acid may also cause levels of diaz-
epam (Valium) to rise. The resulting depression of the cen-
tral nervous system can be Serious, and so great caution
must be exercised if these drugs are combined with valproic
acid.

As noted above, valproic acid can interfere with bleeding
and clotting, and so caution needs to be exercised if it is
combined with other drugs that interfere with bleeding or
clotting, such as warfarin (Coumadin) or aspirin. In addi-
tion, valproic acid can lead to increased blood levels of
warfarin. This can also enhance the tendency to bleed.

Some caution should be exercised when valproic acid is
combined with a tricyclic antidepressant (especially nor-
triptyline and amitriptyline) because the blood levels of the
antidepressant may increase. Your doctor may want to or-

FEELING GOOD 639

der a blood test to check the level of the antidepressant so
the dose can be adjusted if necessary.

Several types of drugs can cause levels of valproic acid
to increase. These include:

antacids;

non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as aspirin,
ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), and others;

cimetidine (Tagamet);

erythromycin (Erythrocin);

felbamate (Felbatol), an anticonvulsant;

lithium. Valproic acid also causes lithium levels to rise,
and so the toxic effects of both drugs can increase;

some antipsychotic drugs, especially phenothiazines
such as chlorpromazine (Thorazine);

¢ SSRI antidepressants such as fluoxetine (Prozac) and
fluvoxamine (Luvox).

If you are taking any of these drugs with valproic acid,
your doctor may need to reduce your dose of valproic acid.

Some anticonvulsants, such as carbamazepine (Tegretol),
ethosuximide (Zarontin), phenytoin (Dilantin) and possibly
phenobarbital (Donnatal) can cause blood levels of valproic
acid to fall, and so doses of valproic acid may need to be
increased. At the same time, valproic acid can cause the
levels of carbamazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital, and
primidone (Mysoline) to increase, and so the doses of these
drugs may need to be reduced when they are combined with
valproic acid. Patients with difficult cases of bipolar illness
may be treated with more than one mood stabilizer, and
some careful attention to these complex drug interactions
will be needed.

Finally, the antibiotic rifampin (Rifadin) can cause blood
levels of valproic acid to fall. This antibiotic is used in the
treatment of tuberculosis, and it is also used as a two-to-

640 David D. Burns, M.D.

four-day preventative treatment for individuals who have
been exposed to patients with certain types of meningitis.

Carbamazepine

Carbamazepine (Tegretol) was introduced in the 1960s as
a treatment for a certain type of epilepsy that originates in
the temporal lobes of the brain. In the 1970s, Japanese in-
vestigators discovered that carbamazepine was helpful in
treating manic-depressive patients who did not respond to
lithium. Although the FDA has not yet officially approved
carbamazepine for the treatment of mania and depression,
it appears to be helpful for 50 percent of bipolar (manic-
depressive) patients who have failed to respond to lithium.
Carbamazepine can be combined with lithium or with one
of the major tranquilizers (also known as neuroleptics) in
order to enhance the effects of these drugs in the treatment
of mania.

Carbamazepine can also be helpful for some rapidly cy-
cling manic-depressives. These individuals have more than
four manic episodes per year and can sometimes be chal-
lenging to treat. Some studies have also suggested that carba-
mazepine may be helpful for manic-depressive patients who
experience anger and paranoia during their ‘‘high’’ phases.
Finally, some psychiatrists report that carbamazepine may
be helpful in the treatment of patients with borderline per-
sonality disorder when severe anxiety, depression and anger
coexist with impulsive, self-destructive behavior such as
wrist-slashing. However, in one study the therapists but not
the patients reported that the carbamazepine was helpful. It
is difficult to know how to interpret such findings.

Many of the studies of carbamazepine have been con-
ducted on patients who were also taking other drugs at the
same time, such as lithium or a neuroleptic. These drugs
can also have effects on mania. Dr. Alan Schatzberg and
his colleagues have pointed out that this makes it difficult
to tease out the true effects of the carbamazepine.’ The

FEELING GOOD 641

limited data and patent issues may explain why the drug is
not yet approved as a primary treatment for mania—be-
cause the safety and effectiveness of the drug in the treat-
ment of mania have not yet been convincingly
demonstrated through large, well-controlled studies.

Doses for Carbamazepine. The beginning dose of car-
bamazepine is 200 mg twice daily for two days. It may
then be raised to 200 mg three times a day for five days.
After this, the dose is gradually increased by 200 mg per
day every five days up to a total daily maximum of 1,200
mg to 1,600 mg.

Carbamazepine usually takes at least one to two weeks
to be effective, as do many psychiatric medications. If it is
helpful, your doctor will probably suggest you stay on the
drug for a longer period of time to prevent a relapse of the
mania.

Blood Testing. Carbamazepine blood testing 1s required,
just as it is for the two mood stabilizers discussed above
(lithium and valproic acid). You will need a blood test
every week for the first two months. After that, you will
need a blood test every one or two months. The results will
guide your doctor in the amount she or he prescribes. The
usual effective blood level for carbamazepine is in the
range of 6 mg to 12 mcg per ml, but some experts rec-
ommend blood levels in the range of 6 mg to 8 mcg per
ml for most patients with depression or mania. Like any
drug, there are fewer side effects at lower doses, but if the
blood level gets too low, the drug will lose its effectiveness.

Levels of other drugs in your blood may fall if you are
taking carbamazepine. This is because carbamazepine stim-
ulates certain liver enzymes, and so your liver clears these
drugs out of your system faster than usual. One of the drugs
that is affected by carbamazepine is carbamazepine! In
other words, after you have been on the drug for several
weeks, you may find that you need a larger dose to maintain
the same blood level. This is because your liver begins to

642 David D. Burns, M.D.

metabolize the carbamazepine more rapidly, so it leaves
your body faster.

Your doctor will probably want to check the blood levels
of certain liver enzymes before you start the carbamazepine,
and from time to time when you are on it. This 1s because
carbamazepine may cause an elevation of liver enzymes in
your blood, indicating possible liver inflammation or dam-
age. Earlier you learned that valproic acid can have similar
effects on the liver. Some elevation of liver enzymes occurs
in most patients taking carbamazepine, but this is not usu-
ally a cause of concern. However, you will still want to
watch out for any signs of hepatitis described in the pre-
vious section on valproic acid.

Your doctor will also order frequent complete blood
counts while you are taking carbamazepine. This is because
carbamazepine may cause a drop in your red blood cells,
white blood cells, or platelets. These cells are all produced
by your bone marrow, and carbamazepine can sometimes
make the bone marrow less active. Each type of blood cell
serves a different function. The white cells help to fight
infections. If you did not have enough white cells, you
would be more vulnerable to infections. As noted above, a
normal white blood cell count is in the range of 6,000 to
10,000. If your white cell count falls below 3,000, your
physician will immediately consult with a hematologist
(blood specialist). Roughly 10 percent of patients taking
carbamazepine experience a drop in the white blood cell
count, and levels below 3,500 are common. You should be
reassured to know that a drop in the white blood cell count
rarely develops into a serious problem. If carbamazepine is
helping you, most doctors will continue prescribing it as
long as your white cell counts are above 1,000. However,
white cell counts below this level can be extremely dan-
gerous, so your physician will monitor your blood count
more frequently if your white cell count starts to drop.

Levels of red blood cells and blood platelets may also
fall if you are taking carbamazepine. The red blood cells
carry oxygen, and the platelets cause bleeding to stop. If

FEELING GOOD 643

your red blood cells fell to very low levels, you would
experience anemia. You might appear pale and feel fa-
tigued. If your platelets fell to low levels, you might ex-
perience an increased tendency to bleed. Dr. Alan
Schatzberg and colleagues’ state that these changes in the
blood count are expected. They emphasize that good patient
education and routine bloodcounts are the best ways to
monitor them.’ If you are taking carbamazepine, make sure
you let your doctor know immediately if you develop any
symptoms suggesting a change in your white cells, plate-
lets, or red blood cells. These include fever, sore throat or
sores in your mouth (indicating possible infection), bruising
or bleeding (indicating a possible drop in the platelets in
your blood), or fatigue along with pale lips and finger nails
(suggesting anemia).

On extremely rare occasions, carbamazepine can cause a
dangerous and potentially fatal failure of the bone marrow.
In these cases, all your blood cells may drop to dangerously
low levels. Recent estimates of severe and dangerous bone
marrow failure range from approximately one patient in
10,000 to one in 125,000, so you can see that this compli-
cation iS very rare.

When carbamazepine was first introduced, this possibil-
ity frightened many physicians, who were understandably
reluctant to use the drug. Neurologists have been by far the
largest group of doctors prescribing carbamazepine because
it can be so valuable in the treatment of epilepsy as well
as trigeminal neuralgia (facial nerve pain). Neurologists
have now had vast experience with this drug and are quite
comfortable with its use. More psychiatrists are also starting
to recognize that this medication can be used safely.

Side Effects of Carbamazepine. A number of common
or significant side effects of carbamazepine are listed in
Table 20-12 on pages 624—625. Tiredness is the most com-
mon side effect, especially at the start of treatment. A third
of patients experience tiredness, and some (5 percent) also
complain of weakness. Raising the dose more slowly can

644 David D. Burns, M.D.

minimize these effects. Usually the drowsiness will wear
off over time. The drowsiness is usually not due to anemia,
but just to the sedative properties of the drug.

Approximately 10 percent of patients report dizziness,
especially when standing. This is due to a temporary drop
in blood pressure because blood tends to pool in your legs
when you rise. As a result, there is not enough blood for
your heart to pump to your brain, and you get dizzy. This
can usually be minimized by standing more slowly and ex-
ercising your legs (such as walking in place) immediately
when you stand up. This “‘squeezes’’ blood from your legs
to your heart so your heart can pump the blood to your
brain.

You will see that carbamazepine can sometimes cause
problems with coordination. This has been reported in as
many as 25 percent of patients. Patients may appear a bit
intoxicated and tend to stagger when walking. This some-
times indicates that the dose is too high. Other symptoms
of an excess dose include double vision, slurred speech,
mental confusion, muscle twitches, tremor, restlessness, and
nausea, along with slowed or irregular breathing, a rapid
heartbeat and changes in blood pressure. Immediate medi-
cal attention is required if these symptoms occur, because
in extreme cases overdoses can lead to stupor, coma, and
death.

You may also experience some nausea and vomiting at
first. These effects are usually temporary and can usually
be managed by raising the dose more slowly and by taking
the medication with food. These effects are probably less
common than with valproic acid or lithium. Most patients
who have been on carbamazepine for several weeks do not
report these effects.

Like the tricyclic antidepressants, carbamazepine can
sometimes cause dry mouth or blurred vision. This is be-
cause carbamazepine blocks the cholinergic receptors (also
called muscarinic receptors) in the brain. These anticholin-
ergic effects are of special concern to patients with glau-
coma, who have increased pressure in their eyes, because

FEELING GOOD 645

the carbamazepine may cause the glaucoma to worsen. If
you have glaucoma you should have your intraocular pres-
sures monitored closely while taking carbamazepine (or any
drug with anticholinergic properties).

A side effect that involves the kidneys is called the syn-
drome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone
(SIADH), or water intoxication. Patients develop a great
increase in thirst along with mental confusion and a fall in
the levels of sodium in the blood. This side effect has been
reported in as many as 5 percent of patients taking carba-
mazepine. If you develop excessive thirst, your doctor may
order an electrolyte test to see if your sodium has dropped.
She or he may want to reduce the dose, change to a dif-
ferent medication, or treat you with a drug called demeclo-
cycline (Declomycin). This drug can often correct the
problem of low sodium levels in your blood. Your doctor
will probably monitor your kidney function from time to
time by checking your levels of blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
and creatinine.

Carbamazepine can have some adverse effects on the
heart. If you are over fifty years of age you should have an
ECG before starting the drug. The ECG should be repeated
after you have been stabilized on the drug to make sure no
changes of a serious nature have occurred. Carbamazepine
often causes a slowing of the heart. These changes appear
to be more common in older women. If you have a history
of heart disease you may do better to take another mood-
stabilizing drug with fewer effects on the heart, such as
valproic acid.

As many as 5 percent to 10 percent of patients taking
carbamazepine may develop a rash. You will see in Table
20-12 that any of the mood stabilizers (as well as many
antidepressants) can cause a rash, but this is somewhat
more common with carbamazepine. It can sometimes help
to avoid direct sunlight (which may provoke the rash in
Some cases), to take an antihistamine, or to change to a
different brand of carbamazepine. This is because you may
be allergic to an ingredient in the pill other than the car-

646 David D. Burns, M.D.

bamazepine itself. On extremely rare occasions, two severe
and potentially fatal skin rashes (called Lyell’s syndrome
and the Stevens-Johnson syndrome) have been reported in
patients taking carbamazepine. Make sure you report any
severe skin changes to your doctor immediately.

Like many other psychiatric drugs, carbamazepine can
cause birth defects, especially spina bifida. A number of
other fetal abnormalities have also been reported recently,
especially when the drug is taken during the first trimester
of pregnancy. Therefore, the potential benefit must clearly
outweigh this risk if the drug is taken during pregnancy.
The risk appears to be significantly higher when carbama-
zepine is combined with other anticonvulsants. If a preg-
nant woman definitely needs the drug, some experts
recommend folic acid supplements that may reduce the
likelihood of birth defects.

Carbamazepine is secreted in mother’s milk. The con-
centration of carbamazepine in the milk is approximately
60 percent of the concentration in the mother’s blood, and
so the issue of nursing must be discussed with the pedia-
trician.

Drug Interactions for Carbamazepine. You can see in
Table 20-14 on pages 648-650 that many drugs can influ-
ence the blood level of carbamazepine, and vice versa, so
you and your physician will have to be very careful in this
regard. At the top of the table, drugs are listed that cause
carbamazepine level and toxicity to increase. If you are
taking any of these drugs, your doctor may need to reduce
the dose of carbamazepine. For example, many of the ma-
crolide antibiotics (erythromycin is a common example)
can double the blood level and toxicity of carbamazepine.

You can also see in Table 20-14 that some drugs, such
as diuretics (water pills) and other anticonvulsant medica-
tions can cause the level of carbamazepine to fall. Your
physician may have to give you a larger dose of carba-
mazepine to compensate for this.

FEELING GOOD 647

Just as certain drugs can cause blood levels of carba-
mazepine to rise or fall, carbamazepine can change the lev-
els of other drugs you are taking. Blood levels of the drugs
that are listed next on the table may fall when combined
with carbamazepine. This is because carbamazepine stim-
ulates the liver enzymes that metabolize these drugs. As a
result, the liver gets rid of these drugs more rapidly than
usual. This would be equivalent to pulling out the plug
while you are trying to fill the bath; the water may not rise
to the proper level.

One important example would be birth control pills. The
consequence of the decreased blood level is that the birth
control pills may become ineffective, and you might be-
come pregnant even though you are taking your birth con-
trol pills consistently. Levels of other drugs listed in the
table that may fall when combined with carbamazepine in-
clude some antidepressants, antipsychotic drugs, anticon-
vulsants, antibiotics, thyroid hormones, and others.

Sometimes the drug interactions work in both directions.
A drug may cause the blood level of carbamazepine to fall,
and carbamazepine may in turn cause the blood level of the
other drug to fall. For example, if you are taking an anti-
psychotic medication like haloperidol (Haldol), which is of-
ten also given for mania, the haloperidol may cause the
level of carbamazepine to fall. At the same time the car-
bamazepine may cause the blood level of haloperidol to
drop substantially. As a result, it may seem that neither drug
is working properly, and the mania may not be controlled
adequately. Your physician may need to do blood tests to
determine the levels of both drugs so that the doses can be
adjusted properly. Carbamazepine probably has similar ef-
fects on other antipsychotic drugs as well.

Finally, several other potentially dangerous drug inter-
actions with carbamazepine are listed at the bottom of the
table. In particular, carbamazepine must not be combined
with any of the MAOIs discussed on page 564 because of

QUIZBXOTIA
(QUBPI9S) UIPeUSsIa}

(UOAIBq)
suoydAxodold

(JaUOD
-B1[9q]) suOTOSIUpald

([QIXOJAL) DUd}O]IX OUI

waINTyH]

OPIWICUTIJOOIU
OPMUVUIOVIU e

PIO’ DIUTOSIUOSI «
(PIgo’]) [Izo1qywes «

Ssnip SUuLIaMO] pIdiy

(woareqd)
suoydAxoydoidonxep

(suLIDOURG) [OZeUep

(ueyes) [IuredeIs3A .
(WISZIPIeD) WaZeTIP »

SIQYIOTG
JouueYyo UINIO[eO

(Jourese]) SUIPNaUIO

(9U0ZIOS)
QUOPOZLJOU

(10Uu}0) syuvssordaprue

SIOYIO «

(JO[OZ) oulye.nias
(XOAN’]) oUTUTeXxOANY
(9eZ01g) ounexony

(STUSs)
sjuvssoldapriue

(ajoyedoq
‘quoyedaq)
PIO® SIOId[VA «

s]UBSTNAUOOIUe

(HNI) PIzeruost «

({@JOZIN)
Q[OZBUOIOJOY «

(UIDAWIOINDY)
OUIJDADLIJO} «

(UIDAWIRIQIA )
OUTTOAOAXOP

(Jay10) sonorquue

ISVIIIUT 0} SJIOJFW IIXO], 10 Spada] ouidazewequies asned ued yA, ssnig

SOPTTOINLVUL 19430

(Ov ],) uloAWOpuUeslON
(s]ozeIped)
UIDAWIOIYJAIO
(urxerg)
UIDAWIOIYILIL]S
(xBWIOIYIIZ)
ULOAUIOIYJIZE «

(SoprlpoIoew) sojorqiue

(xoumeiq)
aprurejozejaoe

“suoljoeIOUI BnIp Aue are aJoyy Jr srowueyd pue 30}90p INOA ysv ‘UOTIeOIPSUT 19U30
Aue pue win] surye) ase nod Jy ‘Apuonbaly nO soWIOd suOTOvIOWUI SNIP INOGe UONCULIOJUT MOU ‘OATJSNeYX JOU SI 3ST] SIU, 70J0N

esuooelalu| Brig euldezeweqied 'pL-O% 91GB

SIOYIO «

uopeyjow
pew [euqreqousyd

(JOpyeH) [opiedoyey .

(sondajoinou) srozymbuey Jofeu

soyeinqiq3eq

(OUITOSAJAJ) DUOPTIUTId «
(UIJUeTICG) ulolAuoUd

(s1saseinq) [AuejUsy
(uIjUOIeZ) OpIWITxnsoyjs «

SOOINIP syues[NAuOoTUe

9Svaidagq 0} SPAT] ouidozeweqies ssned uRD Woy ssnig

seeders ees bird vine shee - of -

am PRTTOMT ST CM TOC tol to oy ae emaanliemnus cobmneniemen ania heinameieaeaanneeinaamamaniiaal

‘suOTeOIpoUL OENeTYyOAsd
UO UONBULIOJUI JO AdINOS JUAT[aOXa UB SI YOO SIUT ,,S1Z—-E1z ‘dd ‘siov.7 wsv.z s8naq Jidosjoyrksg WoIJ Poureigo seM {Qe} SY} UT UOMEULIOJUI sUIOS,

(BWIOD ‘SoINZIOS ‘I9AOJ) SUIOIPUAS UTUO}OIS sjuessoldapnue [OVIN
yey OY} JO SUIMOTS SUIPNJOUT AOIXO} BsNvd ABU ‘ASLI STDAD] (UIXOUP]) UIXOSIp ‘sI[e1sIp
uoissolddns MOLIeuI 3U0g Jo AjITIqissod paseaiour ([EeZO[D) ouldezojo

Laflfq Bnlq |

suo}}Ie.10}U] Shig suidazewueqiey 19y310

(ajloyedaq

‘quayedaq) poe o1o1dyea
(ujuefIq) uloyAuayd
(auljosAj{) suoprurtid

(UIPeUINOD) ULIBJIEM

SOUOUWIOY PIOIAYI

(Inq-oayL) auyfAydooug | (JaLloD-eiJaq) suoTostupeid .«
(OIpay}) ouOTostupardyAyou «

d.
seandeoemuod [B10 (UOIPeda(]) SUOSeYJOWIeXap « SIOYIO « Tearqreqoued
oulydojod) suopeyjoul .
(ouTydofjoq) ouopey sproraysooni09 (jopreH) jopredoyey sjuesqnauoorue
(XOULSA) s[OZepusqoul (soydajoinau) sonoysxsdyue (qe100
(aIsaseinq) [AjueUudy SIOU}O « PendeN
‘OUNWUUI pues) sULIOdSOJIAD
(uldouo[y) wiedezeuoo . SIOY}O « (urofurexqi,) ourpoKokxop +
(UOINDION) WNTUOINISA « (xeuey) ulejozeldye . ([JueJOL) outuresdiunt . "
d. °
(uO[NABg) WuNnTUOMIUe (sxozrmbuen (uLING]IaM) UOIdosdng sonorquur
ssnIp uoyeqniul Aouas1awe JouTW) souldazeipozuaq sjuessoldaprue (jous]A) uaydourwuejo08

duIdezZeWIeGgIe) YIM pouiquios) Udy AA [TRA ABIL S8N.IGg SuMoT[og 94} Jo spaaa] poolg

FEELING GOOD 651

the risk of the potentially fatal serotonin syndrome.

Although Table 20-14 is lengthy, it is not comprehensive
because new drugs and new information about drug inter-
actions are constantly emerging. As noted previously, only
a small percentage of the potential drug interactions have
been studied, and our knowledge about them is rapidly ex-
panding. Other drugs may have important interactions with
carbamazepine, so make sure your physician knows of all
the medications you are taking. Ask specifically if any of
them interact with carbamazepine.

Other Mood Stabilizing Agents

Until recently, lithium, valproic acid, and carbamazepine
were the main drugs used for the treatment of bipolar ill-
ness. Recently, new drugs have been synthesized which
may soon be available to treat patients with this disorder.
Many of these new drugs are actually anticonvulsants that
were designed for the treatment of epilepsy. At least two
of them are already being used in the treatment of bipolar
(manic-depressive) illness, and many others will undoubt-
edly become available in the next several years. It seems
likely that at least some of them will provide powerful new
tools for treating bipolar illness and possibly other psychi-
atric disorders as well.

These new drugs (as well as the three mood stabilizers
discussed previously) are quite different from the antide-
pressants because they do not significantly increase levels
of serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine in the brain.
Instead, they seem to stimulate a transmitter substance
called GABA (gamma-amino butyric acid) or inhibit a
transmitter substance known as glutamate. GABA and glu-
tamate are used by a large percentage of the nerves in the
brain. The anticonvulsants that stimulate GABA tend to
cause sleepiness. Medications in this category include val-
proic acid, discussed above, as well as gabapentin (Neu-
rontin), tiagabine (Gabitril), vigabatrin (Sabril), and several

652 David D. Burns, M.D.

others. The anticonvulsants that inhibit glutamate tend to
cause stimulation and anxiety. Medications in this category
include felbamate (Felbatol), lamotrigine (Lamictal), topi-
ramate (Topamax), and several others.

Although it is not known for certain why or how these
drugs prevent epilepsy or stabilize manic-depressive illness,
it is known that the GABA system and the glutamate sys-
tem in the brain tend to compete with one another. This
may be why drugs that stimulate GABA or inhibit gluta-
mate are helpful for epilepsy and for bipolar illness.

Most anticonvulsant drugs also inhibit sodium transport
across nerve membranes in the brain. Sodium, as you know,
is present in table salt. It is known as an ion, because it
Calrles a tiny positive electrical charge when it is dissolved
in a fluid. The electrical impulses of nerves result when ion
channels in the nerve membranes open up and positively
charged ions like sodium and potassium suddenly rush
across the membrane. These ion fluxes create the electrical
impulses in the nerves. Because these drugs inhibit the so-
dium channels, they may stabilize nerve conduction in the
brain by making nerves less excitable. Because nearly all
anticonvulsants have this property, they are sometimes clas-
sified as ‘‘sodium blockers.’’ The sodium-blocking effects
may also explain why these new drugs can prevent seizures
and stabilize manic-depressive illness.

Of course, all new drugs have unforeseen benefits and
hazards, and the new anticonvulsant drugs are no exception.
Quite a bit of testing will be necessary before we can iden-
tify which ones have most promise for patients with epi-
lepsy and bipolar illness. There is considerable excitement
about one of the new drugs, called gabapentin (Neurontin),
because it seems to have very few side effects, an excellent
safety record, and few if any toxic interactions with other
drugs. In addition, it does not require blood testing like the
three mood stabilizers discussed above.

So far, the FDA has approved gabapentin only for the
treatment of epilepsy. Although it has not yet been officially
approved for psychiatric disorders, many psychiatrists are

FEELING GOOD 653

beginning to prescribe gabapentin for patients with difficult
bipolar illness who have not responded to other medica-
tions. Its eventual role will have to be determined by clin-
ical experience and by controlled outcome studies.

At least eight studies of the use of gabapentin in mood
disorders were published in 1997, and many more will un-
doubtedly be published in subsequent years. In these stud-
ies, gabapentin was reported to be effective for many
patients with bipolar illness. Gabapentin also appeared to
have antidepressant and antianxiety properties, and it may
be useful in the treatment of chronic pain (including mi-
graine headaches), as well as PMS (premenstrual syn-
drome), panic disorder, and social phobia.

Doses for Gabapentin. The current dose of gabapentin
for epilepsy is 300 mg to 600 mg three times daily, for a
total dose range of approximately 900 to 2000 mg per day.
In studies of bipolar patients, the average dose was about
1700 mg per day, with some investigators giving doses as
high as 3600 mg per day.

The absorption of gabapentin from the stomach and in-
testinal tract is not affected by food. However, the antacid
Maalox can reduce the absorption of gabapentin from the
stomach by about 20 percent. Therefore, you should wait
at least two hours after taking Maalox before you take ga-
bapentin.

About half of a dose of gabapentin disappears from the
body within five to seven hours, so it must be taken several
times per day rather than all at once. If you take a high
dose of gabapentin on a single occasion, a smaller propor-
tion of the dose will be absorbed from your stomach and
intestinal tract into your blood. For example, only 75 per-
cent of a single 400-mg dose is absorbed, as compared with
100 percent of a 100-mg dose. From a practical point of
view, this should not be a concern if you are taking gaba-

654 David D. Burns, M.D.

pentin since you will be taking the medication several times
per day in divided doses.

There is no evidence that men and women require dif-
ferent doses because of differences in metabolism, but in-
dividuals over seventy years of age may need only about
half the doses used for younger people. This is because of
changes in kidney function that occur with aging. Because
the kidneys excrete gabapentin, individuals with impaired
kidney function will require smaller doses.

Unlike lithium, carbamazepine, and valproic acid, blood
testing does not appear necessary with gabapentin. This is
another advantage of this medication.

Side Effects of Gabapentin. The main side effects are
listed in Table 20-15 on pages 656-657. You can see that
they include sleepiness, noted above, along with dizziness,
tremor, problems with coordination, weight gain, and some
visual side effects. All of these side effects will be more
pronounced at higher doses and less noticeable at lower
doses. Overall, the side effect profile of gabapentin is very
favorable, especially when compared with the other cur-
rently available mood stabilizers.

In the studies cited in Table 20-15, gabapentin was given
to patients with epilepsy who were already receiving one
or more other anticonvulsants. Therefore, the side effects
that were actually due to the gabapentin were lower. The
best way to get a more realistic estimate of any side effect
is to subtract the percentage seen in the placebo group from
the percentage seen in the gabapentin group. For example,
11.0 percent of the gabapentin group experienced fatigue,
whereas 5.0 percent of the placebo group experienced this
side effect. The difference in these two numbers is 6.0 per-
cent. This is a better estimate of the true incidence of fa-
tigue that can be attributed to gabapentin.

Like nearly all psychiatric drugs, gabapentin should be
used with great caution in pregnant women. Although there
are no well-controlled studies of the effects of gabapentin
on the developing fetus in pregnant women, fetal abnor-

FEELING GOOD 655

malities have been observed when gabapentin was admin-
istered to pregnant mice and rabbits. Although animal
studies do not always predict human responses, gabapentin
should be used in pregnancy only if the need is great and
if the potential benefit outweighs the potential risk to the
developing fetus. Although it is not yet known whether
gabapentin is secreted into human milk, many drugs are
secreted into human milk; consequently, gabapentin should
probably not be used by mothers who are nursing. Cer-
tainly, you should discuss this risk with your physician.

Drug Interactions for Gabapentin. Gabapentin has one
unusual and desirable property; it is not metabolized by the
liver, but is excreted unchanged by the kidneys directly into
the urine. For this reason, it does not seem to interact in
adverse ways with other drugs. You will recall from pre-
vious discussions that all the antidepressants and mood sta-
bilizers have fairly complicated interactions with lots of
other drugs. This is because these drugs compete with each
other for certain metabolic enzymes in the liver. With ga-
bapentin, this is not a problem, so it is much safer to com-
bine gabapentin with other medications. In fact, many
experts believe that gabapentin has no metabolic interac-
tions at all with other drugs. One benefit is that gabapentin
can be combined with other mood stabilizers for patients
with difficult cases of bipolar illness or epilepsy who have
not responded to other medications.

The properties of gabapentin are certainly very appeal-
ing. Is there a downside? Sometimes problems with new
medications surface after the medication has been in wide-
spread use for a period of time and the initial excitement
has worn off. Gabapentin may be no exception. One con-
cern already voiced by some neurologists and psychiatrists
is that the drug may not be particularly effective for either
epilepsy or bipolar illness. This would be disappointing,
since the drug has so few side effects or interactions with
other drugs. A colleague with considerable experience with
gabapentin told me she is using it primarily to help anxious

ssourdaays
onsyey

%L'8
%0'S

AS10Uq

%S'0 WT T yoeuro}s josdn
%S'0 LT yynow A1p
%9' I %6T ules 14319

WId3SAG dAINSISIG

(SLE = U) OgqadeId (eps = u) unuodeqesy

‘PoySI] SIV SjOaJJa OPIS UOWIWIOD dIOUI JY} ATU ‘SS2] 9q 0} AOA] ase ssnip 1oyjO Bury) JOU STeNprIAIpur
UI SJOaTJa opis ayy, “Asdapida Joy Snip JoyjO uO jsvoz Je Burye) Apearye arom oym Asdajida YUM spenplaipul 0} UdAIs sem OQooryd
JO unuodeges ‘soipnys oso) Ul “‘(Ydd) auasafay ysaq S,uDIIISKYd 366] BU} WO, paidepe sem 91qQe} SIU) Ul UOTRULIOJUI OY] :930N

(ujUOINEN) UNUSdeged JO SJOOYA eplS “GL—-OZ BIGeL

UOISIA potany[q
UOISIA ojqnop
(sada ay} JO 1OUIII}) snuIse}sAu

sad

swiajqoid A.1OWIdU

%S'0 yooods pa..in{s
%TE JOWII.1)
%9'S UOHEUIPIOOS YIM 3[qNo.1}

SSOUIZZIp

UI9}SAG SNOAIIN
a SS SS SS SSS SiS SSS SS SS SS ssl Ssh ef or fs SS a ef tpt

658 David D. Burns, M.D.

patients with insomnia, because it has excellent sedative
and relaxing properties and is not habit-forming. Unfortu-
nately, she feels it may not be powerful enough to be a
primary mood stabilizer for bipolar patients, but it may
have value when it is used in combination with other med-
ications.

Another new anticonvulsant, lamotrigine (Lamictal) has
also been approved by the FDA for the treatment of epi-
lepsy. Like gabapentin, lamotrigine has been used in the
treatment of treatment-resistant bipolar illness. Dr. Alan F.
Schatzberg and colleagues’ point out that very few formal
studies of lamotrigine have been conducted in psychiatric
patients, and so the reports of its effectiveness are still
mainly anecdotal. In addition, lamotrigine has some signif-
icant and troubling side effects. In particular, rashes and
skin reactions occur in as many as 5 percent or more of the
adults taking lamotrigine. While most of these rashes are
not dangerous, lamotrigine can cause a severe and life-
threatening skin reaction known as the Stevens-Johnson
syndrome in 1 percent to 2 percent of cases. These skin
reactions are more common in pediatric patients than in
adults, and so lamotrigine should not be given to individ-
uals under sixteen years of age. Taking lamotrigine at
higher doses or in combination with other drugs, such as
valproic acid, may make these feared skin reactions more
likely. In premarketing trials, five patients taking lamotri-
gine died from liver failure or multiorgan failure.

Lamotrigine causes many other side effects such as head-
ache and neck pain, nausea and vomiting, dizziness, loss
of coordination, sleepiness, trouble sleeping, tremor, de-
pression, anxiety, irritability, seizures, speech problems,
memory difficulties, runny nose, rashes, itching, double vi-
sion, blurred vision, vaginal infections, and others. Lamo-
trigine also has a number of interactions with other drugs
because it is metabolized by the liver. Because it has many
side effects, including some dangerous ones, lamotrigine
must be used with great caution. Until we learn more about
it, it should probably be reserved for patients who have

FEELING GOOD 659

failed to respond to the better-established mood stabilizers
discussed above.

What If My Antidepressant Does Not Work?

As I have emphasized, I would recommend taking a
mood test like the one in Chapter 2 to monitor your re-
sponse to any treatment, including medications or psycho-
therapy. You can take the test once a week or even more
frequently, and keep track of your scores. Your scores will
show whether and to what extent the treatment is working.
The goal of treatment is to get these scores reduced sub-
stantially. Ultimately, you want your scores to be in the
range considered normal and ideally in the range considered
happy.

If a drug doesn’t help, or helps only somewhat, what
should you do?

1. Make sure you have given the drug a fair trial. Ask
yourself:

¢ Is the dose adequate?
¢ Have you taken the drug for an adequate period of
time?

2. Make sure there are no drug interactions that are pre-
venting the antidepressant from being effective. Re-
member that some other drugs can cause your blood
level of an antidepressant to fall, even if you are tak-
ing the correct dose of the antidepressant. Inform your
doctor about any other drugs you are taking.

3. You and your doctor may want to consider one of the
augmentation strategies discussed below.

4. If these procedures are not successful, you and your
doctor can discontinue the medication and try another
type of antidepressant.

660 David D. Burns, M.D.

5. Psychotherapy along the lines described in this book,
either alone or in combination with an antidepressant,
can often be far more effective than treatment with
drugs alone.

Let’s examine each of these principles. First, you need
to be certain the dose is sufficient. If for any reason your
blood level of an antidepressant is too low, then the prob-
ability of a positive drug response will be diminished. How-
ever, a dose that is too high might also be less effective.
This is because the side effects at excessively high doses
may counteract the antidepressant effects. Concerns about
the doses of antidepressant drugs are important because dif-
ferent people can metabolize these drugs quite differently.
In other words, given a particular drug at a particular dose,
different people can have dramatically different levels of
the drug in their blood. In fact, the levels of a tricyclic
antidepressant may differ by as much as thirty times in two
different people who both receive comparable doses of the
same drug. This can happen even if the two people are the
same sex, height, and weight.

These differences in blood levels can result from differ-
ences in the ways people absorb a drug from their gastro-
intestinal tracts and from differences in how fast people get
rid of a drug from their blood. Genetics can play a role.
For example, approximately 5 percent to 10 percent of the
Caucasian population in western Europe and the United
States lack the liver enzyme called CYP2D6 (in the P450
family), and 20 percent of the Asian population lack the
enzyme called CYP2C19.” These enzymes help to meta-
bolize a wide variety of drugs including many antidepres-
sants. Individuals who lack either of these enzymes may
develop dramatically higher blood levels of certain antide-
pressants because their liver enzymes cannot get rid of these
drugs nearly as rapidly as the average individual.

Medical conditions such as liver, kidney, or heart disease
can have an impact on the blood level of antidepressants.
Age can also be important. On the average, children and

FEELING GOOD 661

elderly individuals require lower doses of most medications
including antidepressants. You may recall, for example, that
individuals over sixty-five may develop blood levels of sev-
eral SSRIs, citalopram (Celexa), fluoxetine (Prozac) and pa-
roxetine (Paxil), that are approximately 100 percent greater
than the blood levels of younger individuals taking identical
doses. Sometimes gender can play a role as well. As noted
previously, men may develop blood levels of fluoxetine
(Prozac) or sertraline (Zoloft) that are 30 percent to 50 per-
cent lower than women taking similar doses of these med-
ications.

Weather, your personal habits, or other medications you
are taking can sometimes influence blood levels of antide-
pressants or mood stabilizers. For example, if you are
sweating a great deal during the summer, your blood level
of lithium may rise, so your doctor may need to reduce the
dose. If you are a smoker, your body will break down tri-
cyclic antidepressants more rapidly because of the effects
of the nicotine. Consequently, you may need a higher dose
of these antidepressants. Many other drugs that can also
cause a rapid breakdown of tricyclic antidepressants are
listed in Table 20—S. In contrast, some drugs on this table
can slow the metabolism of tricyclic antidepressant drugs
by the liver, leading to excessively high blood levels of the
antidepressants. Remember that these drug interactions can
work both ways: an antidepressant or mood stabilizer may
affect the level or activity of other drugs you are taking,
and vice versa.

Before you and your doctor decide that a particular drug
is not working, make sure that you review the dose with
him or her. Ask about the possibility of drug interactions
if you are taking more than one drug. Your doctor may
want to order a blood test to ensure that the level in your
blood is adequate. Blood-level testing is more commonly
done for the mood stabilizers and for the tricyclic and te-
tracyclic drugs than for other types of antidepressants listed
in Table 20-1.

662 David D. Burns, M.D.

If the blood level is adequate and you have been taking
the medication for a sufficient period of time but your an-
tidepressant is still not working, your doctor may try
switching you to a different type of antidepressant or may
try an augmentation strategy. This involves adding a small
dose of a different drug to try to boost the effect of the
antidepressant. Several kinds of augmentation strategies
currently in vogue are listed in Table 20-16 on pages 664—
669. A complete discussion is beyond the scope of this
book; I will describe just a couple of them to give you a
feel for this approach. Interested readers may want to con-
sult the excellent reference by Schatzberg and his col-
leagues.!

Two drugs commonly used for antidepressant augmen-
tation are lithium, a drug you’ ve learned about in this chap-
ter, and a thyroid hormone called liothyronine (also known
as Cytomel, or T,). Your doctor may add 600 mg to 1,200
mg per day of lithium carbonate or 25 to 50 micrograms
per day of liothyronine to your antidepressant for several
weeks if the antidepressant has not been working ade-
quately. As noted above, lithium is usually used to treat
bipolar (manic-depressive) illness, and liothyronine is used
to treat people with underactive thyroid glands. However,
in this case, the goal is different—the purpose of adding a
small dose of lithium or liothyronine is to make the anti-
depressant more effective. It is not clear why lithium and
liothyronine sometimes have this effect of boosting the ef-
fectiveness of antidepressants.

A liothyronine trial will usually last for one to four
weeks. If you respond positively, your physician may con-
tinue the liothyronine for two more months. Then she or
he will probably taper you off the augmentation medication
over One to two weeks.

The dose of lithium used for augmentation will be ad-
justed with a blood test so that your blood level will remain
in the range of around 0.5 to 0.8 mEq per L. These levels
are a little lower than the levels used to treat patients who

FEELING GOOD 663

are experiencing mania. The lower levels have the advan-
tage of having fewer side effects. The lithium augmentation
trial will generally last for two weeks. Positive results have
been reported when lithium was combined with tricyclics,
SSRIs, and MAOIs. Research studies suggest that as many
as 50 to 70 percent of patients who do not respond to an
antidepressant will respond more favorably when lithium is
added. If there is no improvement in your depression, your
doctor will probably discontinue the lithium as well as the
antidepressant and try another medication.

Some doctors use antidepressant combination therapy for
patients with difficult depressions. For example, one new
approach is to add an SSRI when a tricyclic does not work,
or to add a tricyclic when an SSRI does not work. This
combination can cause large increases in the blood level of
the tricyclic medication, and so your doctor may decrease
the tricyclic first and then check your tricyclic level with a
blood test after you start the SSRI. Your doctor may also
order an ECG to make sure there are no adverse effects on
your heart.

An MAOI might also be combined with a tricyclic an-
tidepressant as a combination antidepressant strategy. This
is an advanced form of treatment for the specialist and re-
quires careful teamwork between you and your doctor. You
will recall that dangerous reactions can result from com-
bining MAOIs with other antidepressant drugs or with lith-
ium. Although the Physician’s Desk Reference advises
against such drug combinations, Schatzberg and colleagues
report that the combination can be safe and helpful to some
patients who fail to respond to single medications.’ To max-
imize safety, these investigators recommend: (1) the MAOI
and tricyclic should be started at the same time; (2) clom-
ipramine should be avoided; (3) the safest tricyclics to use
in combination with MAOIs appear to be amitriptyline
(Elavil) and trimipramine (Surmontil); (4) among the two
commonly prescribed MAOIs, phenelzine (Nardil) appears
to be safer than tranylcypromine (Parnate) to use in com-
bination with a tricyclic.

, Sluessoidopnue Suyucwgne ul 38nIp
SIU} JO SJDaJJo oy} UM passoIdul useq jou sey
AyIoyINE DUO }seo] TV ‘UTeIG oy} UT oULIYdoUIdaIOU Aep
pue sumuedop jo 10sindaid ay) st ouTuele|Auaug | , rod Wis C-SI QOS outueyeyAuoyd

‘SWOIPUAS UTUOIOIJOS OY} OSNed
PINOD STYSS Jo sSIOVIN snid ueydojdAN-7J ‘ureiq |
oY} UI UTUOIOIJAS JO JoSINDaId ay} SI Ueydo AI], Wo ,. Aep tod wis 9-Z ueydoidA3j-J

cz UONeJUOUISNe JOJ pasn aq uoos A[qeqod
[[IMm pue sotradoid juessaidapriue savy 0} sIeadde
I INQ ‘SNIP uoeUSWISNe Ue Sse [ONSOUT 3uIsN
yOA swodal Ou oFe dO], ‘UTeIQ dy} UI Wa}sAs ([q) | JUaWIWIOD | JUOUTUIOD | yUOUTUTOD
Jo1ostuljApreydsoyd ayy Jo Josinoaid yi st [ousouy 39S 29S 22S Ajlep 301M} W3 9 [OUSOUI

sple ourmy

syuaUuoy asog uoyvjuausny | snag uolvjuamsny

juvssaadapyuy fo adk]

ksopoopuvydoyoas  joo1uyy fo jonuvp sy) Woy
wed ul pouleigo sem o[Ge} SIU) Ul UOTeUIJOJUT ‘ssuIMAS YoIvasal ul suodxa Aq poalolsiumupe jsoq pue snoJosuep oie suoTeUIqUIOS
awWo0S ‘sjeutnof oujeryoAsd ul poyst[qnd useq sey ABajes UOTeUSWIBNL SIU] BuIPIeZar YOIeaSaI V[QVIOAL] DIOS Ise] Je Jey) SOICOIpUt
(/) Yeu yoyo y ‘sjuessoidapnue jo sassvo 10feul samy} ISI] SULUINTOD daIyI IXOU OY], “PAWIEJJO SIOU! syuessaidaprjue oui ayvU! 0}
s}dursye ul syuessaidopyue 0} Sasop [[eUS Ul pappe useq SALY JU] SBNIP JO SadAj [VIOADS ISI] SUUINJOO Puoodas pu ISIN OY], :3JON

‘ueud UuoHelUusWUBNY JUesseldeplUY *91-02 sIqeL

1 SIOVW Isoyes ou) oq 01 Jeadde

(uejdrejy) pizexoqzesos! pure ([IpreN) oulzjousyd
pue ‘SIOVI YM sUIqUIOS 01 SYD ISafes ou}

3q 0} Jeodde ((HuOULING) suTUTeIdTUIL pue ([IAeTA)
SUTTAIG NTU “OUIT} Sues a] Je poles oq pnoys
SSNIP YOY ‘UOTeUIQUIOS sIy} JO ssoUdAIATJa

oY) PaUSWUNdOp Jou sAvY SdIpNIs puljq-alqnoqg
“suiodxo JO Spuvy ou} ul ayes ATOATILTAI 9q Ue
UOTVUIQUIOD 9U1 INQ ‘pozqmyoid st o1[9A9AN & pue
IOV ue Jo UOHeUIqUIOD 9Y) Jey) SaIeIS YGd BUL

‘STUSS
JO S}DaJJO OPIS TeNxas ay} IeQuIOS 0} IdwWiane

ue Ul pasn oq osye AvU oUOMdsng ,‘sIy] powLIyuOS
jOU SAPY SIIPNIS PUI[G-s[qQnop ‘IOABMOP, o, Te
uodo ue ul (9eZ0Ig) aUTIOXONY Jo s}asjo ou)
ooureyus 0} UMOYS Ud0q sey (edgng) suomdsng

“(98Z01g) suTjexony

snd uoldoidng wioy sainzias Jo aseo payuewinsop
QUO ISLI] Je SI DIOY], , SOIPNIS payjoU0. ou

NG ‘STYSS oy} soueyus Aeul 1 sodas [eIOpsoue
ale BOUL, “STYSS JO sjojjo opis yenxas oy)
yeQUIOS 0} JdwiIOWe Ue UT pesn aq Aew uoIdoidng

t

sjuvssoidepnuy

-

(Trae)
oul[AIdayrure

JO (a10ul JO)

BU QC] pue Ajrep
([IpIeN) eulzjoueyd
JO (OIOUI IO) BUI CT

Aep sod
BU Cp-SUl CT

; Pash useq savy
Aep sod 30 00¢
0} dn sasop ing

‘Ajjensn sasop MO]

SIOVIN

(redgng) suomdsnq

(UIZINg][aM)
uoidoidnq

evt LUSS JO spoajjye ay} soueyuo

ose Aeul (JaJASsoq]) dUOpOZel) “IOADMOFZT “CIULOSUT
osnevo ABUT SSNIP OM} BSayj dOUTS ‘dass YM doy
0} (ULNGTIIA,) UOIdoIdng Jo (9ez01g) suTOxONyY
0} poppe Uso SI (SH 3UWI QO]) suOpozery

“SUOTLUIQUIOD

ISS pue VOL suunp Ajasojo pasoyuow

aq ISNUI SOD_ *AUDIXO} pue ‘s}aJo apIs

‘S[OAQ] OUTWUIdIsop ul | ase] e osneo AeUl [YSS
dy} osned0q SUOP aq ISNUI BUI}Sa} JOA] POOTG YO].

eciz SIMSS JO Ssiajjo oy} souBYUD [JIM (UTWTeIGION) |

ouiueldisap yey} ysossns syiodal [e1oAas
“DAOGE SUOTIVUIQUIOD YD] pue [OVI UO aj0U 99S

MOTOG SYD UO s}UaMTUIOS 99S

sjuauiMuo’)

*jU0) syuvssoidophnuy

juvssaadapyuy fo ada]

Aep sod
BU QOE-SUI CZ

psAep € Joye

BUI CZ Aq dSPaIOUI
‘sured Jo 3u
OS 10 ouT[A}dLJOU
Bul CZ WM

els ‘PISS ue uo
si uoyed pue VOL
B SuIppe usyM

;popusuIMI0DaI
ould

Jo 3uI ¢/-0¢ 0

sulfAjduiou jo Aep |

Jad 3ul OF {‘WOL
jo ssop f Si

asog uolpjuawusny | snig uolpjuausny

(Ja1Asoq_) suOpoze.g

SVOL

sTaSS


‘ainsseid poolq YBIY 10 aseasip |
yes WM sjucned ul uONNeS YIM pasn aq prnoys
‘SUJUOLU DIOU! OM) JOJ ONUTUOD UD NOK ‘aATISOd
SI osuodsol oy} J] ‘SY9OM INOT 0} DUO UTM

uses 9q plnoys sasuodsoy , SIOVIA pue sTYSS
jo uonejuousne jsossns osye syiodal ases ‘udu

ULY}] USWIOM JOJ DATOAIJo o10U 3q Av ,‘S}[NSos Aep sod 3ul gs
dATeSou poylodas savy SoIPMs JoYyIO ING oSWOL | 0} | A[MO]S ‘Aep (EL ‘youoysa)
YM S][Nsol sAjIsod powodar aaey sotpmis autos , Ip - tod Sui ¢7—-8Ul CZ] SUTUOSAYIOI]

, pojueemMun
SI UONeUIqUIOD oY} pue ‘jsoq ye AyRUS SI
SSOUDATIOIJJO JOJ QOUDPIAD OY “UdsWIOM passaidap
yea] 0} ‘sjuvssoldopnue Joyjo YM UoNeUIqUIOS |
UI JO QUOTe ‘sIBOA JOJ pasn udoq sey udsONS_ | udsoONse

SIUOULIOFT

‘paye[Nus ATJOAO sUI09Aq sjuared |
SUIOS “UleIg DY} UI BSBd[aI UTUOJOJES JoURYUS
ACU Jey) ShIp oyI]-ourwejoydure ue st sIyT

;Aep Jod
sw Qp-SU QZ

(ulWwIpuod)
quIMIvINyUsy

sjuessaiddns ainaddy


‘oumueJoydurey} oul

UO JUSUIUIOD 99S OSTY “SOSTIO dAIsuoyodAy 1083
p[nos pue snojosuep AT[ejUs}od are suoneuIquios
yong ‘(evoydne jeuLrouge) eiueul Jo suloidusAs
podo[aaop ¢ Ul { Inq ‘popuodsal sjuatied

WWIOS ,,SuOIssoIdap AJOIVIJSI-JUSUTIVIN ‘aIOAIS
ym sjuoed ul JOVI ue 01 poppe sem (MolAq
99S) ouT[OUed Jo ouTuIeyoYyduIe ‘Apnis uO UT

‘(aeak Jad saposide Aueul) ,.3ulpoAo pides,, yum
3s0u) AT[etoadsa ‘ssoul[! dAIssordop-orueul Jejodiq
JO Sased YNOYJIP WM suoned ul (ouayedaq)
ploe s101d[ea Jo ([OjIB9L) surdazewueqies

JOYS YM poulquios oq osye AeU WINTYINT
‘sasdejor yuoAoid djoy osye Aur UOTIeUIqUIOD OU],
SATDOIJO JI ponuyuos oq Aeu UOTeUIqUIOD oy} Inq
‘SYOOM DOTY} JO OM} NOL ISP] [JIM [EL oy “own
oY] JO %O¢ jnoge sjuessasdaphue jo syayjo oui
soueyus ABUT SOSOp [[VUIS Ul WNTYI] yeYI JsassNs
SOIPNjs puUl[g-s[qnop pue sorpnis uddo [eJoAas

SJUaUUO)

Aep tod (ouipoxaq)
a BUI ¢ Ie LEIS ouTuejoydure
sjuepnwins
sasop
popraip ut Aep Jad
- Va , Zu 007‘ I-3UI 009 umnny

SIIZIIGUIS POoy]

asog uoyvjuaumsny | snug uolvjuausny

‘BJULUOSUI pue ‘ANTIQeILU ‘AJorxue

YIM ‘UOTIBATIOR pue ‘onsNyey ‘ssoulzzip opnyjoul
SPaJJo BPIS “poJOWUOU oq prnoys sinssaid pooysq
OS ‘uoIsUdLIadAY year] 0} pasn st yy ‘ssoidaoer YY
-¢ SOJBINWIS pue sJojda00I1 vIaq SYDOTq [O[Opulg

‘ouIWeJOYyduIeYIOUI UO JUSUIWIOD Vas

‘OUT OYdUIeYIOU UO JUSWIUIOD 9es
OS[Y ‘OUOP 9q P[NOYS BUNSo} [9Ad[ POOT OS ‘STaAd|
poolq VOL ul | ue sosnes uoneuIquio; sIy]

‘eluarydozryos

plouvsed Zuljquiosal stsoyodsd e pure o8el
asonpold ued sporied pasuo[old IdA0 sasop o3Ie7]
‘[RISIOAOIJUOS SI ‘SSNIp JOYyIO YM WONeUTqUIOD
UI JO qUOTe ‘SIAapJOSIP oteIYOASd JOyI0

Aue ul asn sj ‘sjuessoidapyue yim uoneUIquios
ul snoJosuep ATJeNnusjod pue sAnoippe ATasuejuI
SI 3nIp SIU “SANOIppe oq ued JuUR[NUMS AUY

S19yI0[G-BI9g

{SoM ¢€

JOJ onuyUOD fA]Tep
301M} BUI ¢ 0} |
Ud] “YIoM J IO}J
A[lep d01M} BUI CZ

Aep Jed 3ur
CLR ye JO Aep Jad
BUI CLE 7e pels

Aep sod
SUI ¢ Je Jes

Aep tod
BU ¢ Je 1ICIS

(uaystA) [ofopurd

(VIajAD) auljoured

(ureiTy)
oeprluayd]Ay oul

(uAxosaq)
suTUeJOydUIeYIOU

670 David D. Burns, M.D.

You will see quite a number of additional augmentation
strategies listed in Table 20-16. My experience with these
antidepressant combination and augmentation strategies has
been limited, but I have not been impressed with the results.
I have tried lithium or thyroid augmentation with a number
of patients but none of them seemed to improve. I was not
encouraged to continue with this approach. However, if a
depressed patient has failed to respond to an adequate trial
of several antidepressants, one at a time, from different
chemical classes, then a combination of antidepressants or
an augmentation strategy might be worth a try.

If you have received an adequate dose of an antidepres-
sant for an appropriate period of time and you are not re-
sponding, what antidepressant should you try next? Many
physicians will switch you to an antidepressant of a com-
pletely different class to maximize the chance of a positive
response. This idea makes good sense, since the different
antidepressants have slightly different effects on the brain.
If you have failed to respond to an SSRI such as fluoxetine
(Prozac), your doctor may want to try a tricyclic such as
imipramine (Tofranil), for example. Prozac selectively ac-
tivates the serotonin systems in the brain, whereas imipra-
mine has effects on many different systems.

If you switch to another drug, you will usually need to
taper off your current drug slowly so as to prevent any
withdrawal effects. Antidepressants are not addictive and
they do not cause craving when you stop taking them.
However, they need to be discontinued slowly to prevent
uncomfortable withdrawal reactions. For example, the tri-
cyclics can cause insomnia and upset stomach if you go off
them abruptly, as noted previously.

Further, as noted above, there may be a mandatory wait-
ing period when you are switching from one drug to an-
other. This is because the two drugs might be dangerous if
mixed together, and the effects of the first drug may persist
for a while after you have stopped taking it. The classic
example would be switching from an SSRI, such as fluox-
etine (Prozac), to an MAOIT, such as tranylcypromine (Par-
nate). The combination of these two drugs can cause the

FEELING GOOD 671

previously described serotonin syndrome, which is occa-
sionally fatal. In addition, both types of drugs clear out of the
body slowly, and so a drug-free period is necessary before
switching from one to the other. When switching from Pro-
zac, an SSRI, to Parnate, an MAOI, this waiting period may
be five weeks or more. When switching from Parnate to Pro-
zac, the waiting period will be at least two weeks. With some
combinations of drugs, however, a waiting period is not nec-
essary. Check with your doctor about this.

Suppose that all these strategies fail to bring about an
optimal antidepressant response. What then? In my expe-
rience this is not unusual. I have seen lots of patients who
were treated for years with all kinds of medications and yet
they were still severely depressed. Early in my career, I
realized that drugs did not provide the answer for many
people. That is why I devoted so much of my career to the
development of new psychotherapeutic techniques, such as
those described in this book. I wanted to have more tools
available than just drugs.

In my experience, the idea that a pill alone will solve your
problems and bring you joy is not productive. In contrast, the
willingness to use these cognitive therapy tools, often in
combination with a compassionate, persistent, and creative
therapist will often lead to substantial improvement.

Other Drugs Your Doctor May Prescribe

The various types of antidepressants I have described are
the ones that in my opinion have a clear-cut indication in
the treatment of depression. I will describe several types of
drugs that you might want to avoid, although there are ex-
ceptions to this rule.

Minor Tranquilizers [Benzodiazepines]. Some doctors
use minor tranquilizers (called benzodiazepines) or seda-
tives to treat nervousness and anxiety. The benzodiazepines
include many familiar drugs such as alprazolam (Xanax),
chlordiazepoxide (Librium), clonazepam (Klonopin), clor-

672 David D. Burns, M.D.

azepate (Tranxene), diazepam (Valium), lorazepam (Ati-
van), oxazepam (Serax) and prazepam (Centrax). Minor
tranquilizers may be added to the mix of drugs your doctor
prescribes if you are depressed. Because most depressed
patients also experience anxiety, this practice is unfortu-
nately quite common.

I usually do not recommend minor tranquilizers because
they can be addictive, and the sedation they produce might
make your depression worse. In my experience, anxiety can
nearly always be treated successfully without using these
drugs. Two highly esteemed colleagues from Canada, Dr.
Henny A. Westra from the Queen Elizabeth IT Health Sci-
ences Center, and Dr. Sherry H. Stewart from Dalhousie
University, recently reviewed the world literature on the
treatment of anxiety disorders with cognitive behavioral
therapy versus medications. Based on their careful review
of many clinical outcome studies, the authors recommended
treatment of anxiety disorders with cognitive behavior ther-
apy instead of medications.’ The authors concluded that
cognitive behavioral therapy without drugs is a highly ef-
fective and long lasting treatment for anxiety. In compari-
son, they emphasize that benzodiazepines may give some
limited relief but only for a short period of time, tend to
lose their effectiveness over time, and are very difficult to
discontinue. If you have a serious interest in this topic, the
scholarly article by Drs. Westra and Stewart would be
worth reading.

Although the benzodiazepines such as Ativan, Librium,
Ritrovil (available in Canada), Valium, Xanax, and others
can have wonderfully calming effects almost immediately
after you take them, the main problem is that these relaxing
effects do not last. As soon as the drug leaves your body
a few hours later, there is a high likelihood you will feel
nervous again. In addition, if you take these drugs daily for
more than a few weeks, you may experience withdrawal
effects when you try to go off them. The most common
withdrawal symptoms are anxiety, nervousness and trouble
sleeping. Ironically, these are the exact reasons you started
taking the drug in the first place. These withdrawal symp-

FEELING GOOD 673

toms trick you into thinking you still need the drug, and so
you start taking it again. This is how the pattern of drug
dependency develops. Fortunately, antidepressants are also
effective in treating anxiety, as are the cognitive and be-
havioral therapy techniques described in this book, and
these treatments are not addictive. This is why I avoid the
benzodiazepines in the treatment of depressed or anxious
individuals.

. There are other reasons to avoid minor tranquilizers in
the treatment of anxiety. One of the cardinal treatment prin-
ciples is that anxious individuals must face their fears and
surrender to their fears in order to overcome them. For ex-
ample, if you have a fear of heights, you may have to climb
to the top of a ladder and stand there until the anxiety goes
away. I could give you dozens of examples of patients who
have experienced dramatic improvements or even complete
recoveries when they faced their fears in this way. Anxious
individuals who face their fears often fee] tremendous relief
because they discover their fears were not realistic in the
first place. This realization may not occur if you are simply
taking tranquilizers and not facing your fears. Even if you
do manage to face your fears with the help of tranquilizers,
the medication will tend to reduce the effectiveness of your
efforts. In fact, when doctors prescribe tranquilizers for
anxious patients, there is the danger that this will reinforce
the idea that the fears really are dangerous and must be
avoided and that the uncomfortable symptoms must be sup-
pressed. These messages are the very antithesis of the
newer exposure therapies that have shown so much promise
in the treatment of anxiety.

If your doctor has been prescribing a benzodiazepine, or
suggests this type of medication, a discussion of the pros and
cons would be indicated. Remember that you are the con-
sumer, and your doctor is working for you. You have every
right to discuss your treatment in a frank and respectful way.
This sense of teamwork and collaboration is quite important.

Sedatives. Many prescription sleeping pills can also be ad-
dictive and are easily abused: They can lose their effectiveness

674 David D. Burns, M.D.

after only a few days of regular use. Then greater and greater
doses may be required to put you to sleep. This can lead to a
pattern of drug tolerance and dependency. If you take them
daily, these pills can disrupt your normal sleep pattern. Severe
insomnia 1s a withdrawal symptom from sleeping pills, and
SO every time you try to stop taking the pills you will falsely
conclude that you need them even more. Thus they can
greatly worsen your sleeping difficulties.

In contrast, there are several sedative medications that
enhance sleep without requiring increased doses. In my
opinion, these drugs represent a superior approach to treat-
ing insomnia in depressed individuals. Three that are often
prescribed for this purpose are 25 to 100 mg of trazodone
(Desyrel) or doxepin (Sinequan) or 25 to 50 mg of diphen-
hydramine (Benadryl). The first two are antidepressants that
require a prescription. Benadryl is an antiallergy medication
that is now sold without a prescription. Make sure that you
consult with your doctor before taking any medication,
even one that is sold over the counter, to make sure there
are no dangerous drug interactions with other medications
you are taking. Remember that many over-the-counter
drugs, like Benadryl, were once available only on prescrip-
tion, so they can be just as dangerous as prescription drugs.
The new anticonvulsant, gabapentin, also has sedative and
antianxiety effects without being habit-forming, and some
doctors are prescribing it for this purpose.

If you are having trouble sleeping, you may have personal
problems that make it hard to get to sleep. It could be any-
thing—a problem at school or work, or a conflict with a fam-
ily member or friend. Some people sweep these problems
under the carpet so they won’t have to deal with them. Then
they develop a variety of symptoms instead. Some people
become anxious, others have trouble sleeping, and some de-
velop aches and pains that have no organic causes.

I have always felt it is better to try to identify and solve
the problem rather than masking it with tranquilizers or
sleeping pills. In our culture, the idea of a quick cure is

FEELING GOOD 675

tremendously appealing to patients and physicians alike. It
is easy to prescribe a drug that will make the problem go
away. This contributes greatly to the enormous popularity
of sleeping pills and minor tranquilizers.

Stimulants. How about the “‘pep pills’’ (stimulants) such
as methylphenidate (Ritalin) and the amphetamines that
used to be so commonly prescribed for weight loss? It is
true that these drugs can produce a temporary stimulation
or elation (much like cocaine), but they can also be dan-
gerously habit-forming. When you come down from the
temporary high state, you may tend to crash and experience
an even more profound sense of despair. When given
chronically, these drugs can sometimes produce an aggres-
sive, violent, paranoid reaction resembling schizophrenia.

I have not prescribed stimulants for depressed patients (or
for any other problem) because of my concerns about these
drugs, but this is clearly an area of controversy. Some psy-
chiatrists do prescribe stimulants for elderly depressed pa-
tients under certain circumstances, and they are quite popular
for treating hyperactive children and adolescents. If your
doctor recommends taking such pills, you should certainly
discuss the pros and cons. You might also want to obtain a
second opinion if you feel uncomfortable about the treat-
ment.

There are exceptions to this rule, like any. Because of its
energizing properties, some doctors add methylphenidate
(Ritalin) to a tricyclic antidepressant. This combination may
be helpful for some patients who are very sluggish and
unmotivated. However, methylphenidate also inhibits the
breakdown of most tricyclic antidepressants by the liver,
and so the blood level of these other antidepressants will
increase. This may lead to greater side effects and may
require a reduction in the dose of the antidepressant.

Antipsychotic Medications (Neuroleptics)]. What about
the antipsychotic medications (also called neuroleptics or
‘‘major tranquilizers’’?)? Some of the older drugs in this

676 David D. Burns, M.D.

category include chlorpromazine (Thorazine), chlorprothix-
ene (Taractan), haloperidol (Haldol), fluphenazine (Pro-
lixin), loxapine (Loxitane), mesoridazine (Serentil),
molindone (Moban), perphenazine (Trilafon), pimozide
(Orap), thiothixene (Navane), thioridazine (Mellaril), and
trifluoperazine (Stelazine). Some of the newer drugs include
clozapine (Clozaril), olanzapine (Zyprexa), quetiapine (Ser-
oquel), risperidone (Risperdal), sertindole (Serlect), and zi-
prasidone (trade name not yet available). These agents are
usually reserved for patients with schizophrenia, mania, or
other psychotic disorders. They do not play a major role in
the treatment of most depressed or anxious patients. Pills
that combined an antidepressant with an antipsychotic med-
ication were marketed and promoted in the past, but most
clinical studies have not documented any superior efficacy
of such preparations in the treatment of depression.

Only a minority of depressed individuals benefits from
antipsychotic agents. These include depressed patients who
are delusional—that is, patients who draw false and highly
unrealistic conclusions about external reality. For example,
a depressed patient might have the delusion that there are
worms in his or her body or that there is a conspiracy
against him or her. Elderly depressed patients seem more
likely to develop paranoid delusions. Depressed patients
who are extremely agitated and cannot stop pacing some-
times benefit from the antipsychotic agents as well. How-
ever, the major tranquilizers may also cause a worsening
of the depression because of their tendency to cause sleep-
iness and fatigue.

In addition, unlike most antidepressants, many of the an-
tipsychotic medications carry the risk of an irreversible side
effect called tardive dyskinesia. Tardive dyskinesia is an
abnormality of the face, lips, and tongue; it involves repe-
titious, involuntary movements, such as smacking the lips
over and over or grimacing. The abnormal movements can
also sometimes include the arms, legs, and torso. The major
tranquilizers can also cause a number of other alarming but

FEELING GOOD 677

reversible side effects. Therefore, these drugs should be
used only when they are clearly needed so that their poten-
tial benefit outweighs the potential risk.

Polypharmacy

Polypharmacy refers to the practice of prescribing more
than one psychiatric drug at a time to a particular patient.
The idea is that if one drug 1s good, two, three, or more
will be even better. Doctors may combine antidepressant
drugs with other types of antidepressants as weil as with
other types of drugs, such as minor and major tranquilizers.
The patient ends up taking a cocktail of many different
types of drugs.

Polypharmacy used to be frowned upon. Now the prac-
tice has become more accepted, and many psychiatrists rou-
tinely prescribe two or more drugs for many of their
psychiatric patients. In contrast, if a family physician is
treating your depression, then it is much less likely that she
or he will prescribe more than one psychiatric medication
at a time. This is because a family doctor is usually more
concerned with your medical problems and much less ag-
gressive in the treatment of emotional problems.

In some instances, polypharmacy can be helpful in the
treatment of mood disorders. For example, I have described
several augmentation strategies that might boost the effect-
iveness of an antidepressant. I have also described how the
occasional use of a second medication can combat a drug
side effect. Rational polypharmacy might also be helpful
when a patient has separate disorders that both require treat-
ment. For example, a patient with schizophrenia may also be
depressed and may benefit from a combination of an anti-
psychotic medication along with an antidepressant. A bipo-
lar (manic-depressive) patient may receive an antidepressant
in addition to the lithium during an episode of depression.
During an episode of mania, the doctor may prescribe a
neuroleptic or a benzodiazepine in addition to lithium to

678 David D. Burns, M.D.

combat the acute symptoms, as described previously.

Although there are specific instances like these when
combinations of drugs are indicated, I am usually not in
favor of polypharmacy in the treatment of depression or
anxiety because of the increase in side effects, drug inter-
actions, and costs. In addition, polypharmacy has the ten-
dency to convey the message that all the patient’s problems
can be dealt with by drugs. The patient may take one or
two drugs for depression, one or two additional drugs to
treat the side effects of the antidepressants, one more drug
to treat anxiety, and so on. And if the patient is angry, she
or he may get yet another drug, such as a mood stabilizer,
to treat the anger.

The patient may end up in a rather passive role as a kind
of human test tube. You may think I am exaggerating, but
I have seen numerous patients who were in just this posi-
tion. They were taking lots of drugs with lots of side effects
but were receiving very little benefit from any of them. I
have treated many of these patients successfully with cog-
nitive therapy and no drugs or cognitive therapy and only
one antidepressant.

I believe that some psychiatrists rely too much on drugs.
Why is this? One problem is that most psychiatric training
programs strongly emphasize biological theories about de-
pression and stress the importance of drug treatments for
depression and other disorders. In addition, a great many
of the continuing education programs for psychiatrists in
practice are sponsored by drug companies, and the focus
of these conferences is nearly always on medications. The
psychiatric journals, too, are filled with expensive drug
company advertisements promoting the benefits of the latest
medications for depression or anxiety, but I have never seen
an ad promoting the latest psychotherapy technique. This
is because there is simply no money to pay for such an ad!
Drug companies also fund a great deal of the research on
medications that appears in psychiatric journals, and con-
cerns have been voiced about the potential conflict of in-
terest inherent in such arrangements.

FEELING GOOD 679

I do not mean to sound like a rabble-rouser! This is not
a black-or-white issue. Clearly, the excellent research con-
ducted by the pharmaceutical industry has been an enor-
mous boon to the psychiatric profession and to individuals
suffering from psychiatric disorders. My concern is that the
emphasis on drugs sometimes seems excessive. Unfortu-
nately, some psychiatrists do not have good training in the
newer forms of psychotherapy, including cognitive behav-
ioral therapy, which can be so helpful for individuals suf-
fering from depression and anxiety. When a patient does
not respond to medications, the main response of the psy-
chiatrist may be to increase the dose or add another medi-
cation because this is what the psychiatrist has been trained
to do. And when a patient complains of an ddverse side
effect, the psychiatrist may decide to add some other ad-
ditional drug as an antidote—because that 1s what she or
he has been trained to do. The result in some cases 1s that
patients end up taking more and more drugs in larger and
larger doses—without any real benefits. This is when
polypharmacy can get out of hand.

When I was a psychiatric resident, I used to have the
idea that if only I could find the right ‘‘magic bullet’’ (in
other words, the right pill), I could help every patient. In
those days, we treated our patients with pill after pill after
pill but very little psychotherapy. My clinical experience
taught me over and over again that this model was not
sufficient—too many of my patients simply did not recover,
no matter how many drugs I used, singly or in combina-
tions.

To make things worse, most psychiatrists do not require
patients to take mood tests, like the one in Chapter 2, be-
tween therapy sessions to track progress. As a result, the
psychiatrist may conclude that the patient is being
‘‘helped’’ by a drug when the patient has not really im-
proved substantially. To my way of thinking, treating
patients without session-by-session assessments is anti-
scientific and represents a barrier to good treatment and
progress in the field.

680 David D. Burns, M.D.

Some psychiatrists and many patients are almost exclu-
sively committed to these biological theories and treatments
for depression. They may discount the value of other ap-
proaches, sometimes with a religious fervor. A number of
well-known psychiatrists are quite outspoken in this regard.
The intensity of these debates about psychotherapy versus
drug therapy is sometimes more reminiscent of a power
struggle for turf than an intellectual search for the truth.
Fortunately, there is a growing and healthy trend to rec-
ognize that all of our current psychiatric drugs are limited
in their effectiveness. In addition, there is an increasing
recognition that a combination of medication with the
newer forms of psychotherapy (including cognitive behav-
ioral therapy and others) usually provides a more satisfac-
tory outcome than does treatment with drugs alone.

It is clear that antidepressant drugs can help some indi-
viduals, but it is also clear that many patients do not re-
spond adequately. When patients do not respond, I would
prefer to switch into a different gear and use cognitive ther-
apy or a combination of cognitive therapy and one anti-
depressant medication at a time. Most depressed people
have real problems in their lives, and nearly all of us need
a compassionate, healing relationship with another human
being to talk things out at times. The idea that drugs alone
should work to cure depression and anxiety may be ap-
pealing, but this approach is often ineffective.

To be fair, an exclusive focus on psychotherapy alone
can be just as biased. I have seen patients who did not
respond to many psychotherapeutic interventions that I per-
sonally administered—week after week their depression
scores on the test in Chapter 2 did not change. Sometimes
I prescribed an antidepressant while we continued working
with a variety of psychotherapeutic strategies. Within sev-
eral weeks, the depression and anxiety often began to im-
prove, and the psychotherapy suddenly began to work
better. In these cases, I was glad to have the medications
available.

A final problem contributing to polypharmacy is that

FEELING GOOD 681

many patients are unassertive. Even though they feel un-
comfortable about all the drugs they are taking, they may
sometimes assume that ‘‘the doctor knows best.’’ This is
understandable. The doctor does have a great deal of train-
ing, and the patient’s knowledge is usually limited. In ad-
dition, the patient often admires the doctor and respects his
or her advice. But in psychiatry and psychology, treatment
approaches are far more subjective and varied than in in-
ternal medicine, where the treatments are far more precise
and uniform. Your feelings about the treatment are impor-
tant, and you have every right to share these feelings with
your doctor.

This review of drug-prescribing practices obviously rep-
resents my own approach. Your physician’s ideas might
differ. Psychiatry is still a blend of art and science. Perhaps
some day the ‘‘art’’ will no longer be such a prominent
ingredient. If you feel uncertain about your treatment, ask
your physician questions. State your concerns and urge
your doctor to explain the treatment in simple terms you
understand. After all, it’s your brain and body that are at
risk, not the doctor’s. The sense of teamwork and collab-
oration are important to successful treatment. As long as
the two of you agree to a rational, understandable, and mu-
tually acceptable strategy for your therapy, you will have
an excellent chance of benefiting from your doctor’s efforts
to help you.

Notes and References
(Chapters 17 to 20)

1.

682

Schatzberg; A. F., Cole, J. O., & DeBattista, C. (1997)
Manual of Clinical Psychopharmacology. Third Edi-
tion. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.

. Some psychologists are lobbying for the right to pre-

scribe drugs, and some psychologists in the armed
services have already been licensed to prescribe drugs.
There is intense controversy about the merits of this
proposal. Some psychologists argue that the right to
prescribe drugs is desirable because it will put them on
an even footing to compete with psychiatrists for pa-
tients. Other psychologists argue that drug prescribing
requires extensive medical training and that the profes-
sion will lose an important part of its identity if psy-
chologists win the right to prescribe drugs. They also
point out that the role of the psychiatrist, particularly
in managed care situations, has become quite unap-
pealing. Many psychiatrists who work for HMOs are
now forced to see huge numbers of patients for ex-
tremely brief visits consisting only of discussions about
medications without any time to do psychotherapy or
to learn about the problems in their patients’ lives.

Notes and References (Chapters 17 to 20) 683

. Baxter, L. R., Schwartz, J. M., & Bergman, K. S., et al.
(1992). Caudate glucose metabolic rate changes with
both drug and behavioral therapy for obsessive-
compulsive disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry
49, 681-689.

. Simons, A.D., Garfield, S.L., & Murphy, G.E.
(1984). The process of change in cognitive therapy and
pharmacotherapy for depression. Archives of General
Psychiatry 41, 45-51.

. Antonuccio, D. O., Danton, W. G., & DeNelsky, G. Y.
(1995). Psychotherapy versus medication for depres-
sion: Challenging the conventional wisdom with data.
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice 26 (6)
574-585.

. Dobson, K. S. (1989). A meta-analysis of the efficacy
of cognitive therapy for depression. Journal of Con-
sulting and Clinical Psychology, 57(3), 414-419.

. Hollon, S.D., & Beck, A. T. (1994). Cognitive and
cognitive behavioral therapies. Chapter 10 in A. E.
Bergin & S. L. Garfield (Eds.), Handbook of Psycho-
therapy and Behavioral Change (pp. 428-466). New
York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

. Robinson, L.A., Berman, J. S., & Nemmeyer, R. A.
(1990). Psychotherapy for the treatment of depression:
Comprehensive review of controlled outcome research.
Psychological Bulletin, 108, 30-49.

. Scogin, F., Jamison, C., & Gochneaut, K. (1989). The
comparative efficacy of cognitive and behavioral bib-
liotherapy for mildly and moderately depressed older
adults. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology
57, 403-407.

684 Notes and References (Chapters 17 to 20)

10.

11.

12.

13.

15.

16.

17.

18.

Scogin, F., Hamblin, D., & Beutler, L. (1987). Bib-
liotherapy for depressed older adults: A self-help alter-
native. The Gerontologist 27, 383-387.

Scogin, F., Jamison, C., & Davis, N. (1990). A two-
year follow-up of the effects of bibliotherapy for de-
pressed older adults. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology 58, 665-667.

Jamison, C., & Scogin, F. (1995). Outcome of cogni-
tive bibliotherapy with depressed adults. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology 63, 644-650.

Smith, N. M., Floyd, M. R., Jamison, C., & Scogin, F.
(1997). Three-year follow-up of bibliotherapy for de-
pression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychol-
ogy 65 (2), 324-327.

. Burns, D. D., and Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1991). Coping

styles, homework compliance and the effectiveness of
cognitive-behavioral therapy. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology 59 (2), 305-311.

Burns, D. D., & Auerbach, A. H. (1992). Do self-help
assignments enhance recovery from depression? Psy-
chiatric Annals 22 (9), 464-469.

Dessain, E.C., Schatzberg, A. F., & Woods, B. T.
(1986). Maprotiline treatment in depression: a perspec-
tive on seizures. Archives of General Psychiatry 43,
86-90.

Maxmen, J.S., & Ward, N. G. (1995). Psychotropic
Drugs Fast Facts, Second Edition. New York: W. W.
Norton & Company.

You will notice that the percentages of patients report-
ing stomach upset in Table 20-5 are a little lower than

19.

20.

21.

22.

Notes and References (Chapters 17 to 20) 685

20 percent to 30 percent on the average. This is be-
cause the percentages in the table represent the differ-
ences between the rates for the actual drug minus the
rates for patients taking placebo medications.

You will learn below that the MAOIs can cause dan-
gerous blood pressure elevations, but this 1s only if you
take one of the forbidden foods or medications. Usu-
ally, the MAOIs can cause a mild drop in blood pres-
sure.

A patient with a ‘‘difficult’’ or ‘‘resistant’’ depression
is simply one who does not readily respond to the usual
treatments. If your doctor tries many antidepressant
drugs and you do not improve, your doctor will natu-
rally conclude that your depression is more difficult
than usual to treat. However, you may respond nicely
to another type of treatment. I have treated large num-
bers of patients who had years and years of unsuc-
cessful treatment with a wide variety of drugs prior to
seeing me. Many of these ‘‘difficult’’ patients recov-
ered when I used cognitive therapy techniques like
those described in this book.

No single treatment is a panacea for everyone. That’s
why it is important to have lots of approaches avail-
able, including many different kinds of medicines and
many different kinds of psychotherapeutic methods as
well. The term, ‘‘different strokes for different folks’’
is right on target in the context of depression treatment!

Arky, R. (Medical Consultant). (1998). Physician’s
Desk Reference, 52 Edition. Montvale, NJ: Medical
Economics Company, Inc.

The telephone number of the Madison Institute of Med-
icine is 608-827-2470; their fax is 608-827-2479; their
address is 7617 Mineral Point Road, Suite 300, Mad-

686 Notes and References (Chapters 17 to 20)

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

ison, Wisconsin, 53717; and their email is IN-
FOCTRS @ Healthtechsys.com. They can do literature
searches and supply pamphlets, reprints and other in-
formation for a modest fee.

Preskorn, S. H. (1997). Clinically relevant pharmacol-
ogy of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Clinical
Pharmacokinetics Suppl. 1, 1-21.

Westra, H. A., & Stewart, S. H. (1998). Cognitive be-
havioral therapy and pharmacotherapy: Complemen-
tary or contradictory approaches to the treatment of
anxiety? Clinical Psychology Review 18 (3), 307-340.

Levine, J., Brak, Y., Gonzales, M., et al. (1995).
Double-blind controlled trial of inositol treatment of
major depression. American Journal of Psychiatry 152,
792-794.

Joffee, R. T., & Shuller, D. R. (1993). An open study
of buspirone augmentation of serotonin reuptake inhib-
itors. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 54, 269-271.

Nelson, J. C., & Price, L. H. (1995). Lithium or desi-
pramine augmentation of fluoxetine treatment (letter).
American Journal of Psychiatry 152, 1538-1539.

Weilburg, J. B., Rosenbaum, J. F., Biederman, J., et al.
(1989). Fluoxetine added to non-MAOIT antidepressants
converts nonresponders to responders: a preliminary re-
port. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 50, 447-449.

Nirenberg, A. A., Cole, J. O., & Glass, L. (1992). Pos-
sible trazodone potentiation of fluoxetine: a case series.
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 53, 83-85.

Joffee, R. T., Levitt, A. J., Bagby, R. M. et al. (1993).
Predictors of response to lithium and triodothyronine:

31.

Notes and References (Chapters 17 to 20) 687

augmentation of antidepressants in tricycylic non-
responders. British Journal of Psychiatry 163, 574—-
578.

Fawcett, J., Kravitz, H. M., Zajeda, J. M., et al. (1991).
CNS stimulant potentiation of monoamine oxidase in-
hibitors in treatment of refractory depression. Journal
of Clinical Psychopharmacology 11, 127-132.

Suggested Resources

Other Books by Dr. Burns

The Feeling Good Handbook (New York: Plume, 1990).
Dr. Burns shows how you can use cognitive therapy to
overcome a wide variety of mood problems such as de-
pression, frustration, panic, chronic worry and phobias, as
well as personal relationship problems such as marital con-
flict or difficulties at work.

Intimate Connections (New York: Signet, 1985). Dr.
Burns shows you how to flirt, how to handle people who
give you the run-a-round, and how to get people of the
opposite sex (or the same sex, if that is your preference) to
pursue you.

Ten Days to Self-Esteem and Ten Days to Self-Esteem:
The Leader’s Manual (New York: Quill, 1993). In this ten-
step program, Dr. Burns provides a practical, workable
blueprint for breaking out of the bad moods that rob us of
self-esteem. He provides you with clear, easy-to-understand
instructions and specific tools gleaned from twenty years of
systematic research and psychiatric practice. The Leader’s
Manual shows you how to develop this program in hospi-
tals, clinics, schools, and other institutional settings.

688

Suggested Resources 689
Workshops and Lectures by Dr. Burns

Dr. Burns offers workshops and lectures for mental health
professionals and for general public audiences as well. For
a list of dates and locations, you are invited to visit Dr.
Burns’ Web site at www.FeelingGood.com

Audiotapes for the General Public

Burns, The Perfectionist’s Script for Self-Defeat.

Dr. Burns helps you identify perfectionistic tendencies
and explains how they work against you. He shows you
how to stop setting unrealistically high standards and in-
crease productivity, creativity, and self-satisfaction.

Burns, Feeling Good.

Dr. Burns describes ten common self-defeating thinking
patterns that lead to depression, anxiety, frustration, and
anger. He explains how to replace them with more positive
and realistic attitudes so you can break out of bad moods
and enjoy greater self-esteem now and in the future.

Audiotapes for Mental Health Professionals

Strategies for Therapeutic Success: My Twenty Most Effec-
tive Techniques—Volumes I and II. 8 Cassettes

In this two-day intensive workshop, Dr. Burns illustrates
the most valuable therapy techniques he has developed dur-
ing two decades of clinical practice, training, and research.

Feeling Good: Fast & Effective Treatments for Depression,
Anxiety, and Therapeutic Resistance. 4 Cassettes

Dr. Burns describes the basic principles of CBT and 1l-
lustrates state-of-the-art treatment methods for depression
and anxiety disorders. He also illustrates how to deal with

690 Suggested Resources

; ; ~
difficult, angry patients who seem to sabotage the treatment
because they feel mistrustful and unmotivated.

Feeling Good Together: Cognitive Interpersonal Therapy
4 Cassettes

In this workshop, Dr. Burns shows how to modify the
attitudes that sabotage intimacy and lead to anger and mis-
trust. He also explains how to deal with patients who blame
others for their personal relationship problems.

Rapid, Cost-Effective Treatments for Anxiety Disorders
4 Cassettes

In this workshop, Dr. David Burns shows you how to
integrate three powerful models in the treatment of the en-
tire spectrum of anxiety disorders, including generalized
anxiety, panic disorder (with or without agoraphobia), pho-
bias, social anxiety, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and
post-traumatic stress disorder (including victims of child-
hood sexual abuse).

You may order the audiotapes for professionals or for
the general public by visiting Dr. Burns’ Web page at
www.FeelingGood.com

Treatment and Assessment Tools for Mental
Health Professionals

Therapist’s Toolkit 2000

Includes hundreds of pages of state-of-the-art assessment
and treatment tools for the mental health professional. Pur-
chase includes licensure for unlimited reproduction in your
clinical practice. Site licenses are available.

Feeling Good Web Site

You are invited to visit Dr. Burns’ Web site at www.
FeelingGood.com. This Web site contains imformation
about:

Suggested Resources 691

dates and locations for upcoming lectures and work-
shops by Dr. Burns

audiotapes for the general public

training tapes for mental health professionals (includ-
ing CE credits)

links for referrals to cognitive therapists around the
country

description of Dr. Burns’ new Therapist’s Toolkit
links to other interesting sites

new information of potential interest to patients, ther-
apists, and researchers

Ask The Guru. You can submit questions about any
mental health topic. Answers to selected questions are
posted in a column format.


Index |

Page numbers in italics refer to figures and tables. A small ‘‘n’’
following a page number refers to a note on that page.

accomplishments, self-esteem

and, 327-30
advantages of, 328
disadvantages of, 328-29

does work equal worth, 331-

41
accurate empathy, 185-91
achievement
DAS test score and, 285
worth and, 327-41
achievement trap, 346-51
action, motivation and, 125—
27
active death wish, 387
Adapin, 379
side effects, 53]
adaptive anger, 163-64
Adler, Alfred, 10n
adolescent rejection, 301-2
Agras, Stuart, xxii
air-traffic controllers, 409
alcohol, 330

all-or-nothing thinking, 32-33,

42

American Psychiatric
Association, XXV1
amitriptyline (Elavil, Endep),
448-49, 518
side effects, 499-500, 530
amoxapine (Asendin), 519
side effects, 536
amphetamines, 330
Anafranil, 484, 5/8
side effects, 530
anger, 149-97
as adaptive, 163-65
cognitive therapy and, 153
Freud on, 153
frustration and, 195-96
internalized, 153
irrational statements, 159-
60
labeling, 157
magnification, 158-59
as maladaptive, 164—94
mind reading, 158
Novaco anger scale, 150-52
as productive, 163-65

693

694 Index

anger (continued)
ten things to know about,
194-97
thoughts and, 154-56
Anger Cost-Benefit Analysis,
166
anger hierarchy, 191-93, 192
angry rejection, 303
Anhedonia, 90
antidepressant drug therapy,
10, 11-17, 404, 513n—
681
cognitive therapy and, 10-18
antidepressant drugs, xxi, 404,
427, 441, 474-77
augmentation chart, 664-69
augmentation strategy
concerning, 662-71
being treated with, 478
bupropion (Wellbutrin), 605—
7

consumer’s guide to, 513n-
681

costs of, 515-24

deciding whether or not to
take, 479-80

efficiency of, 483

generic, 516

how to tell if working, 484—
86

how they work, 443-54

ineffective, 659-71

interactions with other
drugs, 505-12

length of time for results
concerning, 487

length of time to take, 489-
90

MAO inhibitors, 444-48,
514, 520, 564-98

medical supervision
concerning, 480

mirtazapine (Remeron), 615-
17

mood elevation and, 486
mood stabilizers, 5/5, 522,
617-59
most effective, 483-85
myths concerning, 464—68
names, doses, and costs of,
518-22
preventing or minimizing
side effects of, 5O1-—5
reasons for side effects of,
498-501
serotonin antagonists, 5/4,
521, 599-605
side effects of, 492-98
simultaneously taking
different, 486—87
SSR inhibitors, 449—50,
514, 520, 547-64
table of, 5/4—J5
taking on long-term basis,
490-91
tapering off, 491
tetracyclic, 514, 519, 524~
27, 534-47
treatment of suicidal
patients, 384
tricyclic, 448-49, 501, 5/4,
518-19, 524-34, 538-47
venlafaxine (Effexor), 611-
15
when not working, 487-89
who benefits from, 480-82
see also individual names
antiheckler technique, 145
antihistamines, 500
Antiperfectionism Sheet, 357
Antiprocrastination Sheet, 99
antipsychotic medications
(neuroleptics), 675-77
Antonuccio, David O., xx,
Xxi, 463

anxiety disorders, 484
cognitive therapy for, xxii
symptoms of, 26

approval, 290-310
DAS test score and, 285
independence and self-

respect, 296-309
need for, 290~92
origin of the problem, 293-—
96
self, 309-10
Archives of General
Psychiatry, 457

Asendin, 519
side effects, 536

augmentation chart, 664-69

augmentation strategy, 486,

662-71
Authoritative Guide to Self-
Help Books, xxix
autonomy, DAS test score
and, 288-89

Aventyl, 519
side effects, 532

averageness, 353

Baxter, Lewis R., Jr., xxi, 457
BDC. See Beck Depression
Checklist
BDI. See Beck Depression
Inventory
Beck, Aaron T., 10n, 21n, 51,
53n, 115, 367, 383, 413,
420
preface by, xi—xiti
interpreting, 21-27
Beck Depression Inventory
(BDI), xxiv, 46, 67, 250,
386, 391
being alone
advantages of, 321
loneliness and, 313-18

Index 695

benzodiazepines, 671~73
Bergman, Kenneth S., xxii,
457
beta-blockers, 502
bibliotherapy, Xxili—xXx1x
studies concerning, Xxili—
XX1X
biological treatments, 460-62
myths concerning, 464—68
vs. psychological
treatments, 456-73
studies concerning, 457-60
bipolar (manic-depressive)
illness, 428-29, 461-62
symptoms of, 430
boosting self-esteem, 53-80
borderline personality disorder
(BPD), 484-85
BPD. See borderline
personality disorder
brain
biology of, 433-38
research, 453—54
brain chemistry, imbalances
in, XXi-xxli, 431-33, 478
theories concerning, 438-43
Brown, Helen Gurley, 334
bupropion (Wellbutrin), 52/,
605-7
doses, 607
drug interactions, 610-11
side effects, 607, 608
Burns Depression Checklist
(BDC), 20-2], 22
Buspar, 450-5]
buspirone (BuSpar), 450-51
But-Rebuttal Method, 107-9,
108

Cade, John, 617

Campbell, Barbara D., xxix

‘*Can’t Lose’’ System, 124—
25, 126

696 Index

carbamazepine (Tegretol),
522, 640-41
blood testing, 641-43
doses, 641
drug interactions, 646—51,
648-50
side effects, 643-46
Celexa, 520
Center for Cognitive Therapy,
13, 22n
chemotherapy, 233
citalopram (Celexa), 520
Cleveland Clinic, 463
clomipramine (Anafranil),
484, 518
side effects, 530
coercion, 92, 116-17
cognitive distortions, 201, 238—
39, 393, 402-3
definitions of, 32-41, 42-43
of suicidal individuals, 392,
394, 401
cognitive rehearsal, 191, 194
cognitive therapy, Xvii-xxiiin,
57
anger and, 153
antidepressant drug therapy
and, 13-14
for anxiety disorders, xxii
for depression, 13-18, /5
dialogue between client and
therapist, 410-11
for eating disorders, xxili
effectiveness of, xx
helplessness and, 419-20
hostility and, 411-16
ingratitude and, 416-17
mood-control techniques of,
10-11
origin of, 9-10
for personality disorders,
XXil

principles of, 12-13
self-criticism vs. self-
defense, 62-68, 69, 76-
77, 134, 244, 261
Studies concerning, xx—
XxXxi, 18
for suicidal individuals, 383—
84, 393-99, 401-3
theory of, xvii—xix
uncertainty and, 419-22
compulsive slowness, 359-60
cooling hot thoughts, 167-69
coping, 70-78
with criticism, 144
with helplessness, 419-22
with hostility, 411-16
with ingratitude, 416-17
with uncertainty, 419-23
Cosmopolitan, 334
criticism
coping with, 146
fear of, 92
overcoming fear of, 131-44

Daily Activity Schedule, 94—
98, 95
Daily Record of Dysfunctional
Thoughts, 65-67, 66, 100-
4, 101-3, 106-7, 170,
208
Danton, William G., 463
DAS. See Dysfunctional
Attitude Scale
death wish, 386-87
defeating guilt, 205-28
antiwhiner technique, 22
Daily Record of
Dysfunctional Thoughts,
208
developing perspective, 225—

learning to stick to your
guns, 218-22
Moorey moaner method,
223-25
‘*should’’ removal
techniques, 208-18
DeNelsky, Gurland Y., xx,
463
Depakene, 522
Depakote, 522
dependency, 311
need for love and, 311, 312—
15, 324-26
depression, XX, XXX—XXXi
antidepressant drug therapy
and, 13-18
antiheckler technique, 145
BDC scores, evaluating, 24—
25
the Beck Depression
Inventory (BDI), xxiv,
46, 67, 250, 386, 391
brain chemistry imbalance
and, XXi-xxil
cognitive therapy as
treatment for, 12~—18
drugs as treatment for, xx—
XX1
effects of, 28
environmental influences
role in, 428-31
Freud on, 144
genetic influences role in,
428-31, 460-62
hopelessness and, 387, 405—
6
identifying silent
assumptions downward-
arrow method, 264—88&
medical science’s approach
to, 403-4
mild chronic, 24
National Institute of Mental

Index 697

Health on, 16-17
negative self-evaluation, 54—
56
negative thinking and, 28-
29, 47-48, 58-59
physical symptoms of, 25-
26, 432
prevalency of, 9
as product of mental
slippage, 13
psychotherapy for, xxi—xxii
realistic, 233
relapses, XXvii—XXvili, 492
sadness and, 231-32
schizophrenia and, 57-58
self-dislike and, 53
sexual drive and, 58
suicide and, 383
willpower and, 81
see also antidepressant drug
therapy; suicidal
individual )
Depression: Causes and
Treatment (Beck), 53,
383n
Depression: Clinical,
Experimental &
Theoretical Aspects
(Beck), 53n
Descartes, René, 455
desipramine (Norpramin,
Pertofrane), 518
side effects, 531
Desyrel, 451-52, 484, 521/,
599
doses, 600
drug interactions, 603—5
side effects, 600-3, 601
Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual (DSM), xxvi
disapproval, 301-9
fear of, 290—92
self-respect and, 301-9

698 Index

disarming critics, 137-42
disarming technique, 117-19
disattribution, 225—26
disqualifying the positive, 34—
36, 42
divalproex sodium (Depakote),
522
do-nothingism, 81-130
coercion, 92
examples of, 83
fear of disapproval or
Criticism, 92
fear of failure, 90-91
fear of success, 91-92
guilt, 93
hopelessness, 82
jumping to conclusions, 89
low frustration tolerance, 92-
93
overwhelming oneself, 89
perfectionism, 90
resentment, 92
self-activation methods, 94—
130
self-blame, 93
self-labeling, 89-90
undervaluing the rewards,
90
doxepin (Adapin, Sinequan),
484, 5/8
side effects, 53]
DSM. See Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual
Dunton, William G., xx
Dyer, Wayne, 162-63
Dysfunctional Attitude Scale
(DAS), 270-89, 296
interpreting your score, 285-—

scoring, 281-84
Dysfunctional Thoughts, Daily
Record of, 65-67, 66,

100-4, /01—3, 106-7,
170, 208
dysthymic disorder, 24

eating disorders, cognitive
therapy for, xxiii
Effexor, 450, 527, 611-12
doses, 612-14
drug interactions, 614-15
side effects, 608, 614
Einstein, Albert, 160, 163
Elavil, 448-49, 518
side effects, 499-500, 530
Eldepryl, 444
side effects, 573
Ellis, Albert, 10n, 116
emotional reasoning, 38, 42,
79
empathy, 135~37, 207
accurate, 184—85
empathy method, 304-6
Endep, side effects, 530
endorsing yourself, 109-10
enlightened manipulation, 177—

entitlement, DAS test score
and, 287-88
environmental influences, role
in depression, 428-31
Eskalith, 522

facts, feelings and, 47-48

failure, fear of, 90-91

fairness, relativity of, 160-62

fear of criticism, 92

overcoming, 131-44

fear of disapproval, 92, 290—
92

fear of failure, 90—91

fear of success, 91-92

feedback, 141-44

Feeling Good (Burns), xxix—
XXX

Feeling Good Handbook
(Burns), xxix
feelings, facts and, 47-48
Floyd, Mark, xxviii
fluoxetine (Prozac), 449—50,
484, 520
side effects, 503-4
fluvoxamine (Luvox), 484,
520
fortune teller error, 37, 42
Freud, Sigmund, 55-56, 144,
153, 198
frustration, 195-96

gabapentin (Neurontin), 522,
651-53
doses, 653-54
drug interactions, 655-58
side effects, 65455, 656—
57
Gabitril, 651-52
Garfield, Sol L., 459
generic drugs, 516
genetic influences, role in
depression, 428-31, 460-
62
The Gerontologist, xxiii
Goldstein, Mark K., 178
gratification, 316-18
‘‘srieving’’ method, 308—9
guilt, 93-94, 198-228
cycle of, 203-4
defeating, 207-28
distortions causing, 199
inappropriate “‘should’’
statements, 201-—3
irresponsibility of, 204—7
thoughts leading to, 198-99

habit management, 122
Hamilton Rating Scale for

Index 699

Depression (HRSD), xxiv—
XXVil
happiness, success and, 329-
30
healthy sadness, 254—55
helplessness, 88
coping with, 419-22
heroin, 330
Hitler, Adolf, 292, 331
hopelessness, 88, 472~—73
depression and, 387-88,
404-5
suicidal individuals and,
386-87, 400, 404-5
Homey, Karen, 10n
hostility, coping with, 411-16,
415
HRSD. See Hamilton Rating
Scale for Depression
human worth scale, 235
hyperpyretic crisis, 575+77
how to avoid, 577—79
medications and drugs to
avoid concerning, 583-99
hypertensive crisis, 375-77
foods to avoid concerning,
579-82
how to avoid, 577-79
medications and drugs to
avoid concerning, 583-98

illusions, 31-32
imaging techniques, 169-72
imipramine (Tofranil), 13, 448-
49, 519
vs. Prozac, 516
side effects, 531
imipramine pamoate (Tofranil
PM), 519
independence, 296-309
cost-benefit analysis, 296—
98

700 Index

independence (continued)
disapproval and, 301-8
need for love, 312-13, 314,
324-26
rejection and, 301-9
self-respect blueprint, 298-
300
verbal techniques, 300-1
Inderal, 502
ingratitude, coping with, 416—
19, 418
internal dialogue, 30
internalized anger, 153
iproniazid, 443-44
irrational statements, 159—60
Irritability Quotient, 149
calculating, 152-53
isocarboxazid (Marplan), 572

Jamison, Christine, xxiii,
XXVili

Jews, 292

job, loss of, 240-50

Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, xxiii

jumping to conclusions, 36,

Kaiser facility, 22n

labeling, 39-40, 43, 157

Lamictal, 522, 658-59

lamotrigine (Lamictal), 522,
658-59

Lazarus, Arnold, 10n

learning to expect craziness,
176-77

Lethargy Cycle, 86, 87

life, loss of, 233~36

malignant attitudes toward,

234

limb, loss of, 237-39

distorted attitudes toward,
237-38
lithium (Eskalith), 26, 522,
617-20
blood testing, 621-22
doses, 620-21
drug interactions, 629-34,
630-31
medical tests prior to
treatment with, 621—22
side effects, 502, 623-29
loneliness, being alone and,
313-18
loss of job, 240-50
loss of life, 233-36
malignant attitude toward,
233-34
loss of limb, 237—40
distorted attitudes toward,
234
loss of a loved one, 251-54
love, 286-87
DAS test score and, 285
need for, 311-26
love junkie, analysis of the
presumed ‘‘advantages’’
of being a, 3/4—-15
loved one, loss of, 251-54
low frustration tolerance, 92—
93
Ludiomil, 519
side effects, 536
Luvox, 484, 520

magnification, 37-38, 42, 158

maladaptive anger, 164

mania, symptoms of, 26-27

manipulative rejection, 303-4

Manson, Charles, 292

MAO, 438

MAO inhibitors, 444-48, 5/4,
520, 564-67

doses, 567-69
foods to avoid when taking,
579-82, 580-81
medications and drugs to
avoid when taking, 583-—
98, 584—90
names, doses, and costs,
520
side effects, 569-75, 572—
73
toxic reactions caused by,
575-79
maprotiline (Ludiomil), 519
side effects, 536
Marplan, 572
Marshall, E., 18n
medical science approaches to
depressive illness, 403-4
mental disorders, major,
symptoms of, 26
mental filter, 34, 42
mid-life crisis, 400-3
mind reading, 36, 42, 143
minimization, 38, 42
Minnet, Ann M., xxix
minor tranquilizers
(benzodiazepines), 671-
73
mirtazapine (Remeron), 452,
521, 615
doses, 615-16
drug interactions, 617
side effects, 609, 616-17
mislabeling, 38-39, 43
monoamine oxidase. See
MAO
monoamine oxidase inhibitors.
See MAO inhibitors
Monroe, Marilyn, 57
Mood Clinic (University of
Pennsylvania), 10, 10n,
13, 412, 413

Index 701

mood-control techniques of
cognitive therapy, 11
mood stabilizers, 5/5
carbamazepine (Tegretol),
640-51
gabapentin (Neurontin), 651—
58
lithium (Eskalith), 617-34
names, doses, and costs,
522
side effects, 624-25
tiagabine (Gabitril), 651-52
valproic acid, 634-40
vigabatrin (Sabril), 651-52
mood swings, 263, 385, 399
Moorey, Stirling, 223
Moorey moaner method, 223~-
24
motivation
action and, 125-27
coercion and, 92, 116-17
motivational paralysis, 86
‘*Mourning and Melancholia’’
(Freud), 56
Murphy, George E., 459
musterbation, 39, 116

Nardil, 444, 520
side effects, 572
National Institute of Mental
Health, 17-18
need for love, 311-26
attitude modification, 320—
26
dependency and, 311, 312-—
15, 324-25
independence and, 313-14,
324-25
Pleasure-Predicting Sheet,
318-24
nefazodone (Serzone), 451-52,
521, 599

702 = Index

nefazodone (continued)
doses, 600
drug interactions, 603-5
side effects, 600-3, 601
negative self-evaluation, 53—
54
negative thinking, 244
depression and, 28-29, 48—
49, 57-58
negotiation, 142-44, 182-84
neuroleptics, 675-76
Neurontin, 522, 651-53
doses, 653-54
drug interactions, 655-58
side effects, 654-55, 656-57
nihilism, 394
nondirective therapy, 60
Norpramin, 5/8
side effects, 53]
nortriptyline (Aventyl), 519
side effects, 532
Novaco, Raymond W., 150n
Novaco anger scale, 150-52

obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD), 484
OCD. See obsessive-
compulsive disorder
Oedipal incestuous fantasies,
198
omnipotence, DAS test score
and, 288
operationalization, 339
original sin, 198
overcoming perfectionism,
352-80
absurdity of all-or-nothing
thinking, 372
advantages and
disadvantages, 354
Antiperfectionism Sheet,
356-58

benefiting from failure, 361—-
66

developing process
orientation, 367-69

focusing on happy
memories, 378-79

focusing on positive side,
372

learning to make mistakes,
370-71

learning from mistakes, 380

lowering one’s standards,
354, 379

personal disclosure, 374-78

as a realistic goal, 358

Response-Prevention Form,
361-62

the role of fear, 360

Setting time limits on one’s
activities, 370

overgeneralization, 33-34, 42
overwhelming yourself, 89

Parnate, 444, 484
side effects, 573
paroxetine (Paxil), 520
pasSive-aggressive type, 85
passive death wish, 386
Paxil, 520
PDR. See Physician’s Desk
Reference
perfectionism, 90
DAS test score and, 285
overcoming, 352-80
personal inadequacy, 53-55
personality disorders,
cognitive therapy for,
XXll
personalization, 40-41, 200
Pertofrane, side effects, 531
PET scanning. See positron
emission tomography

phenelzine (Nardil), 444, 520
side effects, 572
physical handicaps, 237-40
Physician’s Desk Reference
(PDR), 512
Pleasure-Predicting Sheet, 104—
7, 105, 318-22, 319, 349,
350
polypharmacy, 476-77, 677—
81
positive, the, disqualifying, 34—
35, 42
positron emission tomography
(PET scanning), xxii
pregnant women,
antidepressants and, 480
Prinze, Freddie, 57
procrastination, 38, 83-84, 86
productive anger, 163-64
productivity scale, 235
propranolol (Inderal), 502
protriptyline (Vivactil), 5/9
side effects, 532
Prozac, 427, 449-50, 484,
501, 520
vs. Imipramine, 516
side effects, 503-4
psychotherapy, 12, 403
vs. biological treatments,
456-73
myths concerning, 468-73
Studies concerning, 457-60
‘“Psychotherapy vs.
Medication for
Depression,’’ Xx
‘‘Psychotherapy Works, but
for Whom?’’ (Marshall),
18n

rational responses (self-
defense), 244
realistic depressions, 232-33

Index 703

reasoning, emotional, 38, 42,
79
reducing anger, methods of
accurate empathy, 184-91
anger hierarchy, 191-92
cognitive rehearsal, 191-94
cooling hot thoughts, 167-
69
develop the desire, 165-67
enlightened manipulation,
177-80
imaging techniques, 169-72
learn to expect craziness,
176-77
negotiating strategies, 182—
84
putting it all together, 191-—
94
rewrite the rules, 172-74
‘‘should’’ reduction, 180
thought stoppage, 172
rejection, 301-7
recovering from, 308-9
relativity of fairness, 160-62
Remeron, 452, 52], 615
doses, 615-16
drug interactions, 617
side effects, 609, 616-17
remorse, 199
resentment, 92
response prevention, 360
Response-Prevention Form,
361
revenge, developing desire for,
165-67
rewriting the rules, 172-74
Rothko, Mark, 57

Sabril, 651-52

sadness
depression and, 231-32
without suffering, 254—55

704 Index

Santrock, John W., xxix
Schatzberg, Alan F., 574, 598,
627, 640, 643, 658, 662,
663
schizophrenia, depression and,
57
Schwartz, Jeffrey M., xxi-
Xxii, 457
Science, 18n
Scogin, Forest, xxili, XXiv,
XXXVI
sedatives, 673-75
selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors. See SSR
inhibitors
selegiline (Eldepryl), 444
side effects, 573
Self-Activation Methods,
synopsis of, 128-30
self-approval, 309-10
self-blame, 93
self-criticism, 62-67, 68, 76—
77, 134, 243, 261
triple-column technique
concerning, 63
self-defeating behavior, 84—85
self-defense, 62—67, 68, 76—-
77, 134, 141, 244, 248-
49
self-dislike, 53
self-esteem, 235, 261-62
accomplishments and, 327—
40
the achievement trap, 345-—
51
boosting, 53-80
four paths to, 341-45
Pleasure-Predicting Sheet,
349—50
specific methods for, 62—80
self-evaluation, negative, 55—
56
self-labeling, 89-90
self-respect, 296-309
blueprint for, 298-300

cost-benefit analysis, 296—
98, 297-98
disapproval and, 301-9
rejection and, 301-9
verbal techniques, 300-1
sense of worthlessness,
overcoming, 59-61
serotonin, 440-41
serotonin antagonists, 5/4,
599
doses, 599
drug interactions, 603-5
names, doses, and costs,
52]
side effects, 60/
sertraline (Zoloft), 520
Serzone, 451-52, 52], 599
doses, 600
drug interactions, 603-5
side effects, 600-3, 60]
sexual drive, depression and,
58-59
‘“should’’ statements, 39, 42,
175, 181, 208-11
side effects, antidepressant
drugs, 492-98
checklist, 494-96
preventing or minimizing,
501-5
reasons for, 498-501
Silent assumptions, 262-63
cost-benefit method for
evaluating, 297-98
downward-arrow technique,
264-70
Dysfunctional Attitude
Scale, 270-89, 296
vertical-arrow technique,
263-70
Simons, Anne D., 459
Sinequan, 484, 5/8
side effects, 53]

slowness, compulsive, 315-17
Smith, Nancy, xxviti
SSR inhibitors, 449-50, 501,
514, 547-49
doses, 549-52
drug interactions, 559-64,
560-63
names, doses, and costs,
520
side effects, 552-59, 553-
54
Stanford University Medical
Center, 255
stimulants, 675
success
fear of, 91—92
happiness and, 330
visualizing, 119
suicidal impulses, assessing,
386-88
suicidal individual
antidepressant drugs in
treatment of, 383-85
assessing impulses of, 386—
88
bleak outlook of, 384-85
cognitive distortions of, 393-
94, 402-3
cognitive therapy treatment
of, 384, 393-400, 401-4
conviction of insoluble
dilemmas, 400
degree of hopelessness of,
387-88, 404—5
desire for self-mutilation,
389-90
illogic of suicide, 389-401
mid-life crisis and, 400-3
nihilistic theory of, 394-99
suicide, 251—57
depression and, 383
illogic of, 389-401

Index 705

rate among general
population, 383
unrealistic sense of
hopelessness and, 385-86
youngsters and, 383
superachievers, 329
Surmontil, 579
side effects, 532

Task-Interfering Cognitions
(TICs), 112-13
Task-Oriented Cognitions
(TOCs), 112-13
Tegretol, 522, 640-41
blood testing, 641-43
drug interactions, 646-51,
648-50
side effects, 643-46
Ten Commandments, 161
testing your ‘‘can’ts,’’ 123-24
tetracyclic antidepressants,
514, 524-26
doses, 525-27
drug interactions, 538-47,
540-47
names, doses, and costs,
519
side effects, 534—38, 536
thought stoppage, 172
tiagabine (Gabitril), 651-52
TICs. See Task-Interfering
Cognitions
TIC-TOC Technique, 110-11,
112-13
TOCs. See Task-Oriented
Cognitions
Tofranil, 13, 448-49, 5/9
side effects, 531
Tofranil PM, 519
tranquilizers, 9
minor (benzodiazepines),
671-73

706 Index

tranylcypromine (Parnate),
444, 484
side effects, 573
trazodone (Desyrel), 451-52,
484, 521, 599
doses, 600
drug interactions, 603-5
side effects, 600—3, 607
tricyclic antidepressants, 448—
49, 501, 514, 524-25
doses, 525~27
drug interactions, 538-47,
540-47
names, doses, and costs,
518-19
side effects, 527-34, 530-32
trimipramine (Surmontil), 519
side effects, 532
Tuskegee Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, xxviii

UCLA School of Medicine, 457

uncertainty, coping with, 419-
23, 421~22

undervaluing rewards, 90

University of Alabama, xxiii,
XXViil

University of California
(Irvine), 150

University of Nevada, xx, 463

University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, 9,
10, 241, 390

University of Texas (Dallas),
XXiX

valproic acid (Depakene), 522,
634
blood testing, 635-36
doses, 634~35
drug interactions, 638-40
side effects, 636-38

venlafaxine (Effexor), 450,
521, 611-12
doses, 612-14
drug interactions, 614~-15
side effects, 608, 614
vertical-arrow technique for
identifying silent
assumptions, 263-70, 296
vigabatrin (Sabril), 651-52
visualizing success, 108-9
Vivactil, 519
side effects, 532

Washington University School
of Medicine (St. Louis),
459
weekend/holiday blues, 97
Weissman, Arlene, 271-79
Wellbutrin, 527, 605-7
doses, 607
drug interactions, 610-11
side effects, 607, 608
willpower, depression and, 81
work, worth and, 331-40
workaholics, 328
worth
achievement and, 327-30
four paths to self, 345-51
as only a concept, 341-43
Pleasure-Predicting Sheet,
349, 350
work and, 331-40
worthless as a concept, 341-—
44
worthlessness, sense of
overcoming, 59-6]

youngsters, suicide and, 383
Your Erroneous Zones (Dyer),
163

Zoloft, 520

DAVID D. BURNS, M.D.,

graduated magna cum laude from Amherst College, receiv.
his M.D. degree from Stanford University School of Medicin
and completed his psychiatric residency at the University .
Pennsylvania. He has served as Acting Chief of Psychiatry .
the Presbyterian/University of Pennsylvania Medical Cent.
and as Visiting Scholar at the Harvard Medical School. In 199
Ir. Burns and his family returned to California. He is curren:
ly Clinical Associate Professor of Psychiatry and Behavior
Sciences at his alma mater, the Stanford University School .
Medicine, where he ts actively involved in research and teac’
ing. Dr. Burns is certified by the National Board of Psychiatr
nd Neurology.

1), Burns has received numerous awards, including the A.:
Kennett Award from the Society for Biological Psychiatry fi
lis research on brain chemistry and the Distinguishe
( ontribution to Psychology through the Media Award fro:
tlhe Association of Applied and Preventive Psychology. |
1998 he received the Teacher of the Year Award from the grad
initing psychiatric residents at Stanford.
