COPING WITH
TRAUMA-RELATED
DISSQCIATION

SUZETTE BOON « KA
ONNO VAN DER HAR

Coping With
Trauma-Related
Dissociation
Skills Training for Patients
and Their Therapists
SUZETTE BOON
KATHY STEELE
ONNO VAN DER HART
W. W. NORTON & COMPANY
New York • London
A NORTON PROFESSIONAL BOOK
This e-book contains some places that ask the reader to fill in questions or
comments. Please keep pen and paper handy as you read this e-book so that you
can complete the exercises within.

To our patients, who have taught us much,
and are the true inspiration for this manual

CONTENTS
Preface
A Personal Word to Patients
Introduction for Patients
PART ONE
Understanding Dissociation and Trauma-Related
Disorders
1. Understanding Dissociation
2. Symptoms of Dissociation
3. Understanding Dissociative Parts of the Personality
4. Symptoms of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) in
Complex Dissociative Disorders
Part One Skills Review
PART TWO
Initial Skills for Coping With Dissociation
5. Overcoming the Phobia of Inner Experience
6. Learning to Reflect
7. Beginning Work With Dissociative Parts
8. Developing an Inner Sense of Safety
Part Two Skills Review
PART THREE
Improving Daily Life
9. Improving Sleep
10. Establishing a Healthy Daily Structure

11. Free Time and Relaxation
12. Physical Self-Care
13. Developing Healthy Eating Habits
Part Three Skills Review
PART FOUR
Coping With Trauma-Related Triggers and Memories
14. Understanding Traumatic Memories and Triggers
15. Coping With Triggers
16. Planning for Difficult Times
Part Four Skills Review
PART FIVE
Understanding Emotions and Cognitions
17. Understanding Emotions
18. The Window of Tolerance: Learning to Regulate Yourself
19. Understanding Core Beliefs
20. Identifying Cognitive Errors
21. Challenging Dysfunctional Thoughts and Core Beliefs
Part Five Skills Review
PART SIX
Advanced Coping Skills
22. Coping With Anger
23. Coping With Fear
24. Coping With Shame and Guilt
25. Coping With the Needs of Inner Child Parts
26. Coping With Self-Harm
27. Improving Decision Making Through Inner Cooperation
Part Six Skills Review

PART SEVEN
Improving Relationships With Others
28. The Phobias of Attachment and Attachment Loss
29. Resolving Relational Conflict
30. Coping With Isolation and Loneliness
31. Learning to Be Assertive
32. Setting Healthy Personal Boundaries
Part Seven Skills Review
PART EIGHT
Guide for Group Trainers
33. Guide for Group Trainers
34. Introductory Session
35. Leave-Taking Sessions
Appendices
A. DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria
B. Ground Rules for a Skills-Training Group
C. Participant Contract for a Skills-Training Group
D. Skills-Training Group Final Evaluation
References
Acknowledgments
Index

PREFACE
Coping With Trauma-Related Dissociation is the first manual
developed for patients with complex developmental trauma
disorders such as Dissociative Identity Disorder (DID) and
Dissociative Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (DDNOS). The
treatment of complex dissociative disorders has gained increasing
acceptance because these diagnoses have been validated across
numerous populations, and treatment approaches based on expert
clinical consensus have shown consistent and significant promise
(for treatment guidelines, see International Society for the Study of
Trauma and Dissociation [ISSTD], in press). Studies to date,
although methodologically flawed, indicate patients with a
dissociative disorder benefit from treatment that “specifically
focuses on dissociative pathology,” with two thirds showing
improvements in a range of symptoms that include dissociation,
anxiety, depression, general distress, and posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) (Brand, Classen, McNary, & Zaveri, 2009, p.
652). Preliminary efforts to empirically validate these treatments
have shown positive results (Brand, Classen, Lanius, et al., 2009),
and further research is underway.
In the 1990s, skills-training books for traumatized and other
psychotherapy patients began to emerge, but none were specific for
individuals with a complex dissociative disorder. Many focused on
a particular theoretical approach or techniques for problems related
to but not specific for trauma, and thus have become useful
additions to the treatment of traumatized individuals in general.
Some were intended as an adjunct to individual therapy or for
personal use, whereas others were designed for structured group
settings.
These valuable manuals cover a wide range of topics, including
safety, emotional regulation and affect phobia, social anxiety,
addictions, self-harm, depression, anxiety, and relationship issues.
Some of the prominent ones that have been particularly useful for
many trauma survivors include dialectical behavior therapy for

borderline personality (Linehan, 1993); systems training for
emotional predictability and problem solving (STEPPS; Blum et
al., 2008; Bos, Van Wel, Appelo, & Verbraak, 2010 also for
borderline personality; short-term psychodynamic treatment of
affect phobia (McCullough et al., 2003); and mindfulness and
mentalization-based treatments such as acceptance and
commitment therapy (ACT; Follette & Pistorello, 2007).
In the past decade, manuals that specifically address the
treatment of trauma have emerged, a number of them empirically
validated. Several are specific to PSTD, mostly based on cognitive-
behavioral therapy (CBT) and prolonged exposure (for example,
Rothbaum, Foa, & Hembree, 2007; Williams & Poijula, 2002).
Other PTSD manuals have integrated CBT with additional
modalities, including emotion regulation (for example, Ford &
Russo, 2006: trauma adaptive recovery group education and
therapy [TARGET]; Wolfsdorf & Zlotnick, 2001; Zlotnick et al.,
1997); interpersonal and case management for trauma and
addictions (Seeking Safety, Najavits, 2002); and an eclectic
approach Beyond Survival, Vermilyea, 2007). Cloitre, Cohen, and
Koenen (2006) were the first to develop a psychotherapy manual
specifically for complex PTSD in adult survivors of childhood
abuse, based on CBT and attachment-interpersonal-object relations.
In the Netherlands, a stabilization course for complex PTSD,
“Vroeger & Verder” (Dorrepaal, Thomaes, & Draijer, 2008), was
published, adapted from an original manual by C. Zlotnick et al.,
with some additional materials.
Some of these trauma-focused manuals are meant to
specifically address the treatment of traumatic memories, but expert
consensus indicates that patients with a complex dissociative
disorder are at significant risk of being destabilized and may even
decompensate when they are exposed prematurely to traumatic
memories. The vast majority of these patients require a significant
period of stabilization and skills building before they can
successfully tolerate and integrate traumatic memories. In fact, the
general clinical consensus for the treatment of chronically
traumatized individuals, including patients with DID or DDNOS, is
phase-oriented individual outpatient therapy, consisting of the
following: (1) stabilization, symptom reduction, and skills training;
(2) treatment of traumatic memories; and (3) personality integration
and rehabilitation (Boon & Van der Hart, 1991; Brown, Scheflin, &

Hammond, 1998; Chu, 1998; Courtois, 1999; Herman, 1992;
ISSTD, in press; Kluft, 1999; Steele & Van der Hart, 2009; Steele,
Van der Hart, & Nijenhuis, 2001, 2005; Van der Hart, Van der
Kolk, & Boon, 1998; Van der Hart, Nijenhuis, & Steele, 2006).
The treatment guidelines for DID and DDNOS (ISSTD, 2011)
and other publications by experts in the field provide an excellent
overview of treatment approaches (for example, Kluft & Fine,
1993; Kluft, 1999, 2006; Putnam, 1989; 1997; Ross, 1989, 1997;
Steele & Van der Hart, 2009; Van der Hart, Nijenhuis, & Steele,
2006). These publications also provide specific interventions.
Nevertheless, therapists are still left to cull a hodgepodge of
specific Phase I skills-based techniques from the literature and rich
oral traditions of the field of dissociative disorders, leaving any
given treatment at the mercy of the therapist’s creativity and
familiarity with the literature. In this manual, we have attempted to
gather fundamental Phase I stabilization techniques for patients and
their therapists, specifically tailored to address the dissociation that
underlies and maintains many of their symptoms. Some of these
skills include mentalization; mindfulness; emotion and impulse
regulation; inner empathy, communication, and cooperation;
development of inner safety; and cognitive, affective, and relational
skills.
At the heart of the manual is approximately 30 years of clinical
experience that each of the authors has had with patients who have
DID or DDNOS, coupled with the magnificent and foundational
work of many other colleagues who are pioneers in the field. It is
well known that clinical innovations come from clinicians, not
researchers (Westen, Novotny, & Thompson-Brenner, 2004), and
until sufficient randomized controlled studies have been conducted
on treatment of complex dissociative disorders, we are reliant upon
this hard-won clinical wisdom. For the first time, this manual
provides an operationalized treatment protocol that is subject to
empirical validation for this most-in-need population which has
been excluded from other studies on trauma treatments.
Development of the Skills-Training Manual
This manual is partly based on ongoing learning experiences with
outpatient day treatment programs for patients with DID in the past
decade in The Netherlands. These day programs usually ran daily

during the week for a half to a full day, and they included
adjunctive therapies, such as art and movement therapy. This
distinguished them from the more cognitively oriented courses for
borderline personality disorder. The nonverbal, experiential
components of these treatment programs proved to be particularly
destabilizing for many patients with complex dissociative disorders
in the early stages of treatment. These modalities can reactivate
traumatic memories and dissociative parts, which results in
disorganization of the person as a whole, especially when the
phobia of inner experience remains intense. These difficulties led
one of us (S. B.) to develop a manualized course of limited
duration, comparable to skills training such as dialectical behavior
therapy (Linehan, 1993) and STEPPS (Blum et al., 2008; Bos et al.,
2010), but specifically designed for patients with complex
dissociative disorders.
An empirically validated Dutch stabilization course for patients
with complex PTSD, developed by Ethy Dorrepaal, Kathleen
Thomaes, and Nel Draijer (Dorrepaal, Thomaes, & Draijer, 2006,
2008), was the most important published source of inspiration for
Coping With Trauma-Related Dissociation. As part of a research
study, one of the authors (S. B.) conducted in 2005 a group for
complex PTSD patients with an earlier unpublished version of this
Dutch manual, Vroeger en Verder (Dorrepaal, Thomaes, & Draijer,
2006, 2008), and was greatly impressed with the results. However,
patients with a complex dissociative disorder (DID and DDNOS
subtype 1) were excluded, which further galvanized efforts to
produce a manual specific for dissociative disorders. A positive
experience with the Complex PTSD group was the impetus for the
first author (S. B.) to develop a manual for patients with a complex
dissociative disorder.
This manual has a comparable format to, and overlap in some
themes in, Vroeger & Verder (Dorrepaal, Thomaes, & Draijer,
2008) and the STEPPS manual for emotion regulation in borderline
personality disorder (Blum, Pfohl, St. John, & Black, 1992); it also
has some similarities with other trauma-related skills manuals
(Cloitre, Koenen, & Cohen, 2006; Harris, 1998; Najavits, 2001).
What is unique about this manual is that it highlights ways for both
the dissociative patient and the therapist to effectively work with an
underlying dissociative organization of the personality as an
essential part of coping with many of the well-known symptoms of

chronic traumatization.
Over the past 6 years, several expert clinicians, including one of
the authors (S. B.), have used an earlier version of the manual to
conduct skills-training groups in The Netherlands, and more
recently in Norway and Finland, resulting in further suggestions to
improve the manual. Finally, over the past 3 years, the authors have
collaborated intensively to refine and expand the manual. We have
consulted with numerous other colleagues and some patients in an
effort to receive a wide range of feedback and suggestions.
Although the manual was originally developed as a structured
skills-based group treatment, we quickly came to realize that it can
also be an invaluable adjunct to patients in individual therapy and
can serve as a handbook for therapists. Thus, the manual can be
used either for group or for individual purposes. And although this
manual was developed specifically for patients with complex
dissociative disorders, much of the content is also highly relevant
for people with complex PTSD and trauma-related personality
disorders.
Therapists who use the manual as part of individual therapy
with patients should note that chapter 34, Introductory Session, and
chapter 35, Leave-Taking Sessions, are for group use only.
All clinicians and patients should be cautioned that this manual
is in no way a substitute for comprehensive treatment of
dissociative disorders, nor for adequate training and supervision in
the treatment of complex dissociative disorders. We strongly
recommend that anyone using this manual become familiar with the
updated International Society for the Study of Trauma and
Dissociation Treatment Guidelines for DID and DDNOS (ISSTD
Treatment Guidelines, 2011).
For more information on treatment of dissociative disorders,
visit the Web site of the International Society for the Study of
Trauma and Dissociation at http://www.isst-d.org or the Web site
of the European Society for Trauma and Dissociation at
http://www.estd.org.
For more information about Coping with Trauma-Related
Dissociation, the authors, and specialized training for therapists,
visit our Web site at http://www.copingwithdissociation.com.

A PERSONAL WORD TO PATIENTS
Let’s keep this just between us, but if someone had offered this
book to me a few years ago, I would have run away screaming—if
not on the outside, then certainly inside of me. I admit that this
would not have been the best response given the situation, but hey,
it was not unusual for me at that time to react differently from how
I should have done. Back then, I felt like I was constantly pushing a
wheelbarrow full of frogs down a bumpy, winding road. The frogs
would not stay put; they croaked at the slightest movement and
made the wheelbarrow lean over dangerously whenever I
encountered a bump or a pothole on my way. It often took more
strength than I thought I had to keep this wheelbarrow upright and
to continue down the road.
The worst part, however, was that I didn’t see anyone else
struggling with such a peculiar load. I was ashamed of my
wheelbarrow and did my best to make sure that nobody would
notice it. After all, what could I answer if someone were to ask me
how I came by so many frogs? To be honest, I hardly knew most of
my frogs. I thought of them as green monsters and regarded them
as no more than a burden that I had to bear. I did not even know
how or when some of them had climbed into my wheelbarrow—or
why.
Then one day, when I arrived at the biggest, deepest pothole in
the road, I realized that I could no longer do this alone and that I
needed help from someone else to keep the wheelbarrow upright on
this stretch of the road. It took a lot of courage and a great deal of
trust to dare ask for that help—trust in that other person, but even
more, genuine trust in myself. I needed to believe that I could ask
for such help, that I would not helplessly collapse if someone cast
an eye on my many frogs, and that together we would find a way
past, through, or over the biggest obstacles.
Trust is an important theme in this book. Again and again, you
will read that you and all of your parts must learn to rely on each
other, that it is important to connect with people you can count on,

and that you can be sure of the support of your therapist. Of course,
it is not at all easy to have or to feel such trust. However, that may
be the most important (and most beautiful) lesson you can learn
from this book: that there are people you can trust and that you are
worthy of letting yourself be seen by them.
The authors of this book are such people. When you read what
they have written, you will find that they have your very best
interests at heart. They possess the knowledge, the experience, and
the empathic skills to help you. I know, because I have worked
through each and every topic in this book as part of my own
process. Suzette Boon, Kathy Steele, and Onno van der Hart know
what they are talking about. When I look back on the years I
struggled with the topics they discuss in this book, I can only say
that what they write is true. And, much more important, it helps.
I know my frogs now. If anything, they have turned from green
monsters into dear green friends. They sit still when I want them to
—and if the path becomes somewhat treacherous again at times,
they are very willing to lend a hand and help push my
wheelbarrow. They have considerably diminished in number, by
the way, but that doesn’t even seem important anymore. Together,
the load was a lot easier to carry anyway.
In order to come to this point, I have had to learn many new
skills. All of those skills are included in this book. I did not write
the book, of course. Still, it feels like it’s about me. That is
probably exactly why I would have run away if someone had given
it to me at the beginning of my therapy: It named that which I did
not want to have named and it showed what I preferred never to
look at. As I said above, it was not unusual for me at that time to
react differently from how I should have done. With the wisdom
that comes from hindsight, I would now accept it with both hands.
If this were indeed my book, I would dedicate it to my therapist
—for the way she taught me how to trust her and for the trust she
had in me. However, it is not my book. It belongs to you. And to
your therapist. Now all you need to do is to take a deep breath, turn
over the pages, and get to work. Believe in yourself, believe in all
your parts, and believe in your therapist.
I know you can. I trust in you.
—Jolanda Treffers

INTRODUCTION FOR PATIENTS
This manual was developed for those of you who are struggling
with complex trauma-related dissociative disorders, that is,
dissociative identity disorder (DID) and dissociative disorder not
otherwise specified (DDNOS, subtype 1). These disorders are often
misunderstood by the public, and publications about treatment have
been written primarily for mental health professionals. There is
little reliable and practical help to be found, other than that which
your therapists have been able to offer. Many of you have spent
years in the mental health system before your core dissociative
problems were recognized and treated. This manual offers you
practical solutions to dissociative problems during the first phase of
your treatment. We explain dissociation and other trauma-related
symptoms in basic language, and we help you understand and work
with dissociative parts of yourself in a rational manner. You will be
introduced to essential ideas and themes useful to your healing
from dissociation and trauma, and you will also learn practical
skills to help you manage in daily life.
We strongly recommend that you use this manual only in the
course of individual therapy or in a structured skills-training group
run by trained clinicians, so that you will make the most of your
experience and will receive adequate support. This manual is not
intended to be used by yourself when you are not in therapy,
although some content may be helpful. The manual may also be
helpful to your loved ones who wish to understand and support you
more effectively.
Each chapter includes an educational topic relevant to trauma
and dissociation, as well as strategies to help you cope more
effectively with your dissociation and other trauma-related
problems. Homework assignments are included for every topic to
help you practice your new skills. If you are using this manual in
your individual therapy rather than participating in a group, you
may ignore the agenda at the beginning of each chapter, as well as
the entire Part 8, chapters 33–35, which are focused on group

participation.
Some topics may not be relevant to you. Nevertheless, you may
find some helpful tips in those chapters, so we encourage you to at
least read about the topics before you decide to skip those chapters.
Some topics may be too overwhelming or premature for you at this
time. That is fine. Just skip those chapters and continue with those
chapters that are right for you.
It is essential that you practice the homework exercises and
modify them to your own needs as necessary. Reading the manual
may be helpful, but it is no substitute for the consistent practice that
earns you new skills. Make sure you collaborate with your therapist
in your work in the manual.
It is essential for you to pace yourself in your work on this
material. At any time you begin to feel overwhelmed, simply stop
and practice grounding exercises and focus on the present moment,
and consult your therapist, if needed. Healing takes time, and
pushing yourself too hard can actually slow your progress. On the
other hand, not pushing yourself at all to overcome avoidance of
painful issues or to practice new skills also slows your healing.
Find your pace, and if needed, ask your therapist to help you know
when to push and when to slow down.
Participation in any of the exercises in this manual is voluntary.
We have attempted to make the exercises appropriate for a wide
range of individuals, but of course, not all exercises may be helpful
or even right for you as an individual. Even though people with a
dissociative disorder have much in common, they also have many
differences. You will receive maximum benefit from the course if
you can practice the exercises as much as possible, but you should
also be aware of what is and is not helpful to you. Feel free to
modify exercises for your benefit, to come up with some of your
own, or to enlist the help of your therapist in additional ways to
practice the various skills in this manual.
Throughout the manual you will often be asked whether you
encountered any difficulties in completing your homework.
Awareness of these obstacles is the first step in overcoming them. It
is essential for you to take any difficulties to your individual
therapist to receive further help and support.

Coping With
Trauma-Related Dissociation

PART ONE
Understanding Dissociation and
Trauma-Related Disorders

CHAPTER ONE
Understanding Dissociation
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on the introductory session
• Exercise: Learning to Be Present
• Topic: Understanding Dissociation
Introduction
Learning to Be Present
Understanding Dissociation
The Origins of Chronic Dissociation
Dissociative Disorders
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Practice the Learning to Be Present exercise twice a
day, morning and evening, or an equivalent exercise
that you and your therapist have agreed is best for you.
Complete Homework Sheet 1.1, Reflections on What
You Have Learned.
Introduction
This manual focuses on helping you understand and cope with
dissociation and the major dissociative disorders, as well as related
experiences and problems. It is important from the beginning that
you pace your work in this manual and also in your therapy
according to what is tolerable for you at a given time. You may find
that focusing on your dissociative symptoms may increase your
anxiety temporarily; however, gaining an understanding of what is
happening within you and learning more effective ways to cope
will soon help you feel more relaxed and comfortable with your
inner experiences. If you become too anxious at any time while

working in this manual, stop for awhile and practice the Learning to
Be Present exercise found later in this chapter or other exercises in
this book that will help you become calmer and more grounded.
You can always return at a later time to finish a chapter. You will
begin by learning more about how to stay present. Once you have
practiced the exercise suggested for being present, you can read
about dissociation in the chapter.
Learning to Be Present
Being in the present, being aware of your surroundings and of
yourself, is essential to learning, growing, and healing from a
dissociative disorder. In the moment you are present, the past is
behind you. Thus, before introducing any other topics, we begin
with an exercise to help you focus on being present, because it is
the foundation for all the work you will do in this manual and in
your therapy, and because we know that when you have a
dissociative disorder it can be a struggle to be present.
People with dissociative disorders encounter a number of
problems that interfere with being present. When you are under
stress or faced with a painful conflict or intense emotion, you may
have a variety of ways to retreat from the present in order to avoid
it. Although retreat may feel better in the moment, in the long run
you will become increasingly avoidant of the present, which can
make your problems worse.
There may be times when you feel spacey, foggy, or fuzzy. You
may lose a firm connection with the present without even being
aware of it, and only realize afterwards that you were not very
present. Perhaps you become engulfed by negative images, feelings
or thoughts from the past, or worries about the future such that you
are so preoccupied in your own mind that you are not aware of the
present. You may have times when you are aware of your actions,
as though you are watching yourself, but do not feel you have
control over them. It may seem as though you are present and not
present at the same time! In addition, some people with complex
dissociative disorders lose time, that is, they cannot account for
what happened during significant periods of time in the present.
And some people may “blank out” for periods and not be aware of
anything. Other people retreat to fantasy or daydreams when life
feels too stressful.

The following concentration exercise can help you focus your
attention on the here and now. You can begin to learn to stop
yourself from spacing out and eventually to overcome much of
your dissociation by learning to stay present. Remember to gauge
whether the following exercise is helpful to you, and if not, stop or
modify it.
EXERCISE
LEARNING TO BE PRESENT
• Notice three objects that you see in the room and pay close
attention to their details (shape, color, texture, size, etc.).
Make sure you do not hurry through this part of the exercise.
Let your eyes linger over each object. Name three
characteristics of the object out loud to yourself, for example,
“It is blue. It is big. It is round.”
• Notice three sounds that you hear in the present (inside or
outside of the room). Listen to their quality. Are they loud or
soft, constant or intermittent, pleasant or unpleasant? Again,
name three characteristics of the sound out loud to yourself,
for example, “It is loud, grating, and definitely unpleasant.”
• Now touch three objects close to you and describe out loud to
yourself how they feel, for example, rough, smooth, cold,
warm, hard or soft, and so forth.
• Return to the three objects that you have chosen to observe
with your eyes. As you notice them, concentrate on the fact
that you are here and now with these objects in the present, in
this room. Next, notice the sounds and concentrate on the fact
that you are here in this room with those sounds. Finally, do
the same with the objects you have touched. You can expand
this exercise by repeating it several times, three items for
each sense, then two for each, then one, and then build it up
again to three. You can also add new items to keep your
practice fresh.
Examples
• Sight: Look around the room for something (or even
someone) that can help remind you that you are in the
present, for example, a piece of clothing you are wearing that

you like, a particular color or shape or texture, a picture on
the wall, a small object, a book. Name the object to yourself
out loud.
• Sound: Use the sounds around you to help you really focus
on the here and now. For example, listen to the normal
everyday noises around you: the heat or air conditioning or
refrigerator running, people talking, doors opening or
closing, traffic sounds, birds singing, a fan blowing. You can
remind yourself: “These are the sounds of normal life all
around me. I am safe. I am here.”
• Taste: Carry a small item of food with you that has a pleasant
but intense taste, for example, lozenges, mints, hard candy or
gum, a piece of fruit such as an orange or banana. If you feel
ungrounded, pop it into your mouth and focus on the flavor
and the feel of it in your mouth to help you be more here and
now.
• Smell: Carry something small with you that has a pleasant
smell, for example, a favorite hand lotion, perfume,
aftershave, or an aromatic fruit such as an orange. When you
start to feel spacey or otherwise not very present, a pleasant
smell is a powerful reminder of the present.
• Touch: Try one or more of the following touch exercises that
feels good to you. Touch the chair or sofa on which you are
sitting, or your clothes. Feel them with your fingers and be
very aware of the textures and weight of the fabric. Try
pushing on the floor with your feet, so that you can really feel
the floor supporting you. Squeeze your hands together and let
the pressure and warmth remind you that you are here and
now. Press your tongue hard to the roof of your mouth. Cross
your arms over your chest with your fingertips on your collar
bones and pat your chest, alternating left and right, reminding
yourself that you are in the present and safe (the butterfly
hug, Artigas & Jarero, 2005).
• Breathing: The way in which we breathe is crucial in helping
us to be present. When people dissociate or space out, they
are usually breathing very shallowly and rapidly or hold their
breath too long. Take time to slow and regulate your
breathing. Breathe in through your nose to a slow count of
three, hold to the count of three, and then breathe out through
your mouth to a slow count of three. Do this several times

while being mindful of how you breathe.
Notice whether there are already ways in which you ground
yourself in the present.
Understanding Dissociation
In the following sections, you will learn about dissociation that
developed from past trauma. This concept is based on years of
careful observations and study (Boon, 1997; Boon & Draijer, 1993;
Van der Hart & Boon, 1997; Van der Hart, Nijenhuis, & Steele,
2006), including historical research into the original 19th-century
literature on the subject and the lessons of the late 20th-century
pioneers in the dissociative disorder literature (for instance, Braun,
1986; Chu, 1998; Horevitz & Loewenstein, 1994; Kluft, 1985;
Kluft & Fine, 1993; Loewenstein, 1991; Michelson & Ray, 1996;
Putnam, 1989, 1997; Ross, 1989, 1997). Dissociation is a word that
is used for many different symptoms, and at times, it is understood
differently by various professionals. We will begin by explaining
integration, which is what you strive for as a major part of your
healing.
Integration
To understand dissociation, it is helpful first to understand a bit
about its opposite, that is, integration. In the context of dissociative
disorders, integration can be understood as the organization of all
the different aspects of personality (including our sense of self) into
a unified whole that functions in a cohesive manner.
Each of us is born with a natural tendency to integrate our
experiences into a coherent, whole life history and a stable sense of
who we are. Our integrative capacity helps us to distinguish the
past from the present and to keep ourselves in the present, even
when we are remembering our past or contemplating our future. It
also helps us develop our sense of self. The more secure and safe
our emotional and physical environment as we grow up, the more
we are able to further develop and strengthen this integrative
capacity.
Each of us develops typical and lasting ways of thinking,
feeling, acting, and perceiving that are collectively called our
personality. Of course, personality is not a “thing” that can be seen,

or that lives and breathes, but rather is a shorthand term that
describes our unique characteristic responses as complex, living
systems. Usually, people function in a coordinated way so that they
make smooth transitions between their response patterns to adjust
and adapt to different situations, like shifting gears in a car. They
can go from home to work and smoothly shift their thinking,
feeling, decision making, and acting, yet still experience
themselves as the same person. In this sense, our personality is
stable and predictable. Yet, to be most effective in our lives, we are
always subtly changing, adjusting, adapting, and reorganizing our
personality as we learn and experience more. In this sense, our
personality is flexible.
Sense of Self
Over the course of our development, we gradually learn to connect
our life experiences across time and situations with our sense of
self. We can then have a fairly clear perception of who we are, and
we can place these experiences in our “life history” as an integral
part of our autobiography. Each of us has a sense of self that is part
of our personality and that should be consistent across our
development and across different circumstances: “I am me, I am
myself as a child, as an adolescent, as an adult, as a parent, as a
worker. I am me, myself in good, in difficult, and in overwhelming
circumstances. These circumstances and experiences all belong to
me. My thoughts, behaviors, emotions, sensations, and memories—
no matter how pleasant or unpleasant—all belong to me.”
Dissociation
Dissociation is a major failure of integration that interferes with and
changes our sense of self and our personality. Our integrative
capacity can be chronically impaired if we are traumatized. It can
also be disrupted or limited when we are extremely tired, stressed,
or seriously ill, but in these cases, the disruption is temporary.
Childhood traumatization can profoundly hamper our ability to
integrate our experiences into a coherent and whole life narrative
because the integrative capacity of children is much more limited
than adults and is still developing.
Of course, not all failures in integration result in dissociation.
Integrative failures are on a continuum. Dissociation involves a
kind of parallel owning and disowning of experience: While one

part of you owns an experience, another part of you does not. Thus,
people with dissociative disorders do not feel integrated and instead
feel fragmented because they have memories, thoughts, feelings,
behaviors, and so forth that they experience as uncharacteristic and
foreign, as though these do not belong to themselves. Their
personality is not able to “shift gears” smoothly from one response
pattern to another; rather, their sense of self and enduring patterns
of response change from situation to situation, and they are not very
effective at adopting new ways of coping. They experience more
than one sense of self, and they do not experience these selves as
(completely) belonging to one person.
Dissociative Parts of the Personality
These divided senses of self and response patterns are called
dissociative parts of the personality. It is as though there are not
enough links or mental connections between one sense of self and
another, between one set of responses and another. For example, a
person with a dissociative disorder has the experience that some
painful memories of her childhood are not hers: “I did not have
those bad experiences; I am not that little girl. She is scared, but
that is not my fear. She is helpless, but that is not my helplessness.”
This lack of realization, this experience of “not me” is the essence
of dissociative disorders.
The functions of each dissociative part of personality or self
may range from extremely limited to more elaborate. The latter is
especially true in cases of dissociative identity disorder (DID),
which will be explained in more detail in chapter 3. Dissociation
takes many forms, which we will discuss in the next chapter on
symptoms. Many dissociative symptoms are common in people
with dissociative disorders, but each individual may also have his
or her own unique subjective experience of dissociation.
The Origins of Chronic Dissociation
Dissociation generally develops when an experience is too
threatening or overwhelming at the time for a person to be able to
integrate it fully, especially in the absence of adequate emotional
support. Chronic dissociation among parts of the personality or self
may become a “survival strategy” in those who have experienced
early childhood trauma. To some degree, dissociation allows a

person to try to go on with normal life by continuing to avoid being
overwhelmed by extremely stressful experiences in both the present
and the past. Unfortunately, it also leaves one or more parts of the
person “stuck” in unresolved experiences and another part forever
trying to avoid these unintegrated experiences.
It is important for you to know that in your journey toward
understanding and coping with your dissociation, you do not need
to focus immediately on the painful past. Rather, the first goal is to
make sense of the dissociative aspects of yourself and to learn to
deal more effectively with them so you can feel better in your daily
life. Resolving the past comes after you learn to cope in the present
both with your external and with your inner world.
There are biological, social, and environmental factors that
make people more vulnerable to dissociation. Some people may
have a biological tendency to dissociate or perhaps have organic
problems with their brain that make it more difficult for them to
integrate experience in general. Young children have less ability to
integrate traumatic experiences than adults because their brains are
not yet mature enough to do so. Their sense of self and personality
are not yet very cohesive, and thus they are more prone to
dissociation. And it has long been recognized that those without
sufficient social and emotional support are more vulnerable to
developing chronic trauma-related disorders, especially those who
experience chronic childhood abuse and neglect. Finally, many
families simply lack the skills to deal well with difficult feelings
and topics; thus, they cannot help children who have been
overwhelmed to learn effective emotional coping skills. Such skills
are needed to overcome dissociation and resolve traumatic
experiences. It is these skills, among others, that you will learn in
this manual.
Dissociative Disorders
When people dissociate chronically in ways that disrupt their lives,
they may be diagnosed with a dissociative disorder. There are
several dissociative disorders, and it is important to know that these
classifications cannot completely describe any individual; in fact,
we are still learning about dissociation. There is general agreement,
however, that the major complex dissociative disorders typically
develop in childhood, and that they are the result of disruptions in

the integration of the child’s personality and sense of self, the
effects of which continue on into adulthood.
At present, there are two classifications of diagnoses, and they
differ to some degree from each other. One is the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), which is currently
in its fourth edition (American Psychiatric Association [APA],
1994), with the fifth in progress at the time of publication of this
manual. Each new edition includes changes to the criteria for
mental diagnoses based on further research and other developments
in the mental health field. The DSM is the major classification
system that is used in the United States and many other countries.
The other classification system is published by the World Health
Organization (WHO) and is known as the International
Classification of Diseases (ICD). Some European and other
countries primarily use the current 10th edition of the ICD (WHO,
1992). If we consider a continuum of trauma-related disorders, with
post​traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) being the most basic, and
developing in the aftermath of a traumatizing incident at any age,
then complex dissociative disorders are a more pervasive
developmental accommodation to trauma that originates in
childhood, and they are further along the continuum.
This manual focuses on two particular dissociative disorders:
Disso​ciative Identity Disorder (DID) and another dissociative
disorder that is a kind of catchall category for people who have
milder but similar symptoms of DID, called Dissociative Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified, Type 1b (DDNOS) (see Appendix A).
This latter disorder actually includes the majority of people who
seek treatment for a dissociative disorder. The central difficulty in
both disorders is a dissociation of the personality and self in which
dissociative parts may take control of behavior or experience, or
influence the person’s behavior or experience from within. Of
course, all dissociative parts compose the single personality of the
person as a whole (International Society for the Study of Trauma
and Dissociation [ISSTD], in press; Kluft, 2006; Putnam, 1989;
Ross, 1997; Van der Hart et al., 2006).
You should discuss your diagnosis with your therapist if you
have questions or concerns. Remember, diagnoses are not labels
that make a statement about who you are. Rather, they are just ways
to categorize broad experiences so that your therapist can help you.
Most people with complex dissociative disorders first enter therapy

with other complaints, such as anxiety, panic, depression, eating
and sleeping difficulties, substance abuse, self-harm, suicidal
tendencies, somatic problems, pseudoseizures, and relational
difficulties. If the therapist does not adequately screen for an
underlying dissociative disorder, such a person can spend much
time in treatment without necessarily getting the relief that he or
she needs. Usually these problems or symptoms will resolve when
it becomes clear how they are related to an underlying dissociation
of the personality, because dissociation can maintain these
symptoms until it is addressed.
In this manual we have tried to offer practical help for you to
cope with symptoms of dissociation that trouble you, rather than to
focus on diagnosis. Of course, diagnosis is important, because it
provides a map for you and your therapist to follow so that you get
proper help. But because the diagnostic criteria change from time to
time, and there are even legitimate disagreements about these
criteria, it is probably most helpful for you to focus on what will aid
you in resolving the dissociation that hampers your life, rather than
to worry too much about your diagnosis.
Practice the exercise at the beginning of the chapter: Learning
to be Present. Practice at least twice a day for a few minutes each
time. You might try doing the exercise as soon as you get up and
just before going to bed. You can also do this kind of exercise for a
few moments wherever you are during the day.

Homework Sheet 1.1
Reflections on What You Have Learned
Reflect on what you have read in this chapter about dissociation.
• Notice and write down what may and may not fit your
experience.
• Notice and write down any thoughts, emotions, concerns, fears,
questions, or other experiences that come to your mind.
• Notice if you tend to want to avoid the topic, and if so, how you
avoid.

CHAPTER TWO
Symptoms of Dissociation
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on the previous session
• Exercise: Learning to Be Present
• Topic: Symptoms of Dissociation
Introduction
Problems With Identity or Sense of Self
Experiencing Too Little: Dissociative Symptoms
Involving Apparent Loss of Function
Experiencing Too Much: Dissociative Symptoms
Involving Intrusions
Other Changes in Awareness
Expansion of the Learning to Be Present Exercise:
Finding Your Own Anchors to the Present
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 2.1, Recognizing
Dissociative Symptoms.
Continue to practice the Learning to Be Present
exercise twice a day, morning and evening (see
chapter 1).
Complete Homework Sheet 2.2, List of Safe Anchors
to the Present.
Introduction
Dissociation involves a wide array of symptoms, from mild to
severe, from temporary to chronic. For those with dissociative
disorders, symptoms are generally chronic and interfere with daily
life, at least to a degree. Some dissociative symptoms are not only

found in dissociative disorders but also in other psychiatric
disorders. Among professionals there is an ongoing discussion
about which symptoms should be considered dissociative, and
which may be other, more common, symptoms related to changes
in awareness and consciousness that everyone experiences to some
degree. In this and the following chapter, we will describe the most
important symptoms of dissociation.
Problems With Identity or Sense of Self
The majority of people with a dissociative disorder do not come to
therapy with complaints about their identity or sense of self.
Instead, they seek help for other problems, such as depression,
anxiety, sleep problems, or relationship problems. But they also
experience what seem to be strange and frightening symptoms that
do not make sense, and which often lead them to fear they are
“crazy.” They often have few words to describe these inner
experiences and may not share them unless asked because they are
ashamed. In fact, these symptoms are usually related to the
disowned actions of other parts of the personality or self. Once
people understand their dissociative symptoms, they usually begin
to feel more comfortable.
One of the major symptoms of dissociation is a sense of
involuntariness, that is, a person is aware of thoughts, feelings,
behaviors, memories, and events, and so forth, but these
experiences do not seem to belong to him or her. These experiences
have a quality of “not me.” Some people have a sense of being
“more than one person” or of having different “voices” or
identities, some of which may have their own name, age, and other
characteristics that are different from the person’s experience of his
or her own identity.
Each dissociative part of the personality has the potential to
develop a relatively individual view of self, others, and the world,
often with diverse thoughts, predictions, feelings and behavior from
other parts, even if very limited. As a result, individuals with a
dissociative disorder can be very confused about who they really
are, what they think, feel, do, wish, or experience in their body.
Dissociative parts of the personality are not actually separate
identities or personalities in one body, but rather parts of a single
individual that are not yet functioning together in a smooth,

coordinated, and flexible way. In the next chapter we will describe
dissociative parts of the personality in more detail.
The inner division of the personality can manifest in a range of
symptoms that can be described in terms of experiencing “too
little” or “too much.”
Experiencing Too Little: Dissociative Symptoms
Involving Apparent Loss of Functions
Some dissociative symptoms involve apparent loss of certain
functions or experiences that, in principle, you should be able to
own. Thus, you experience “too little.” For example, you may have
amnesia, the loss of (“too little”) memory for important events or
segments of your life. Or perhaps you may suddenly seem to lose a
skill or knowledge that otherwise is a natural part of your life, such
as being able to drive or manage money. Commonly, people who
dissociate report that they suddenly are unable to feel an emotion or
sensation in their body: They become emotionally or physically
numb. These losses are not permanent or due to medical conditions,
such as dementia or neurological problems. They are due to the
activity of other parts of the personality that are rather separate
from you.
These losses are only “apparent” because the function or
experience that tends not to be available to you may actually be
available to another part of yourself. For example, although you
may not remember being afraid as a child, another part feels fear or
terror whenever certain reminders of childhood events are evoked.
You can see from this example that while you may experience too
little (emotional numbness), another part of you may be
experiencing too much, for example, overwhelming feelings. We
will discuss symptoms of experiencing “too much” later in the
chapter.
Dissociative Amnesia (Loss of Memory)
Everyone has natural amnesia for most of life prior to the age of 3
years because of immaturity of the brain, and people may not recall
too much about the years before school. Of course, no one
remembers everything that has happened to him or her, and
everyone has a degree of normal forgetfulness and memory
distortion. But generally people should have a fairly consistent

recollection of their lives and the major events in their lives by the
time they start elementary school, enough to be able to tell a
flowing narrative about themselves.
Amnesia goes far beyond normal forgetfulness. It involves
serious memory problems that are not caused by illness or extreme
fatigue, by alcohol or other mind-altering substances, or normal
forgetting. Amnesia falls on a continuum. People with a
dissociative disorder may recall some aspects of an event but not
other essential parts of it. In some cases all memory for certain
events is unavailable for conscious recall. Some people with a
dissociative disorder describe their memory as being like “Swiss
cheese holes,” “foggy,” or “full of black holes.” They may suspect
that something happened, or may have even been told by others that
something happened to them, but have no personal recollection of
events and often feel afraid to think about them. People may have
amnesia for longer periods of time during which normal life events
took place, for example, a person may report being unable to
remember anything from the fifth grade, or from ages 9–12.
People may not only have amnesia for the past but also for the
present. This is called “time loss” and is a hallmark symptom of
DIDs. People may find themselves in a place and have no idea how
they got there, or they may report that there are hours or even days
when they do not know what they have been doing. Or they
discover that they have evidently done something (such as
shopping or going to the library) but have no memory of doing so.
They may meet others who recognize them, but have no
recollection of ever meeting the other person. Some people find
that others talk to them about a topic as though there had been some
previous conversations about it, but they do not recall any
conversations, and the topic does not seem familiar.
These symptoms, when they are not due to stressful inattention,
are often related to the fact that one part is engaging in a behavior
of which another part has limited or no awareness. Thus, there are
parts that go shopping or to the library, while other parts are
unaware of these actions, or in more extreme cases, parts that may
have their own friends while other parts have never met these
people. Frequent or prolonged time loss is much more common in
DID than in DDNOS.
Time Distortions

People with a dissociative disorder often have related problems of
time distortion (Van der Hart & Steele, 1997). They experience
time passing by much too slow or fast; perhaps more time has
passed than they thought, or an hour seems like an entire day. Some
parts of the personality are often quite confused about where they
are in space and time, believing they are still in the past.
Alienation or Estrangement From Yourself or Your Body
(Depersonalization)
Many people normally experience temporary forms of
depersonalization when tired or stressed, and it is a common
symptom in many mental disorders. There is some discussion
among professionals about whether some depersonalization
symptoms are dissociative or whether they might be better
categorized as other kinds of changes in awareness (Boon &
Draijer, 1993, 1995; Steele, Dorahy, Van der Hart, & Nijenhuis,
2009; Van der Hart et al., 2006). We describe these other changes
of awareness in the last paragraph of this chapter.
Feeling estranged from yourself often involves dissociative
parts of the personality, for example, one part of you may feel
numb, blank, or foggy, but there may be another part that likely is
overwhelmed. Or you may have the experience of watching
yourself from outside your body, and see another part of yourself
doing things as if you are watching someone else.
Some people with a dissociative disorder are able to know and
recall what has happened in a situation, that is, they do not have
amnesia, but they feel as if it did not really happen to them
personally, as if it was a movie or a dream they were watching. Or
they may know it happened, but they do not realize it happened to
them, as though they were watching it happen to another person. In
this way, they are able to continue to distance themselves from
overwhelming experiences. Disconnection from emotions can make
people feel as if they exist solely “in their head,” as if they are dead
inside, or like they are “wrapped in cotton,” or feel like
“cardboard” or “one dimensional.” It seems as though they are not
really in the present; they feel unreal, like they do not really exist or
have any control over their actions. Some people also report a sense
of being on automatic pilot or like a robot.
When people with a dissociative disorder are alienated from
their body, they may be insensitive to physical pain or lack

sensation in parts of their body. Some people report that they do not
always properly register heat and cold, cannot feel whether they are
hungry or tired, or feel numb in their body. Again, it is typically the
case that other parts of the self do feel the physical pain, the
hunger, or other bodily sensations.
There are many different symptoms of depersonalization, but in
every case it seems to be a way of avoiding or attempting to
regulate overwhelming feelings or experiences. Depersonalization
symptoms may be temporary or chronic.
Alienation or Estrangement From Your Surroundings
(Derealization)
In addition to alienation from yourself, you may also have the
unsettling experience that your surroundings or people around you
seem unreal. For example, your own house may appear to be
unfamiliar, strange, or unreal, as though you are visiting someone
else’s house. Or a person you know well may seem strange and
unfamiliar. The world may feel unreal as though you are in a dream
or a play. Sometimes your surroundings may appear hazy, foggy, or
distant. People’s voices may sound very far away, as if down a long
tunnel, even though they are close, or they seem far away visually
even though they are right next to you. In people with a dissociative
disorder, these symptoms of unfamiliarity or unreality may, at least
some of the time, be related to parts of the personality that are
living in trauma time, that is, they confuse the present with the past
and thus do not experience the present as real or familiar. These
parts may influence your perception of the reality to such an extent
that you can become confused.
Experiencing Too Much: Dissociative Symptoms
Involving Intrusions
Dissociative intrusions are those symptoms that occur when one
dissociative part intrudes into the experience of another. Intrusions
may happen in any arena of experience: memories, thoughts,
feelings, perceptions, ideas, wishes, needs, movements, or
behaviors. That is why so many different symptoms have a
dissociative underpinning.
Possible dissociative intrusions include flashbacks of past
traumatic events; sudden feelings, thoughts, impulses, or behaviors

that come “out of the blue;” unexplained pain or other sensations
that have no known medical cause; a sense of being physically
controlled by someone else or other forces beyond your control;
hearing voices commenting, arguing, criticizing, crying, or
speaking in the background; or other jarring inner experiences that
do not feel like your own. These experiences occur when a
dissociative part of yourself enters your conscious awareness and
you are privy to at least some aspects of what that part of you is
experiencing. Such symptoms may wax and wane, depending on
the circumstances and how much stress you are under.
At least in the beginning of therapy, it is often hard to know
whether a symptom is dissociative, that is, related to a dissociative
part of the personality. It is important for you to take your time in
understanding the origin and meaning of your symptoms. One
difficulty in recognizing dissociation is that people sometimes do
not have words to describe their symptoms. It is important for you
to practice being aware of and describing inner experiences,
whether dissociative or not. This awareness will allow you to make
more sense out of all of your experiences, and it will gradually help
you cope more effectively with your inner experiences. The
homework exercises at the end of the chapter are designed to help
you become more aware of and more able to describe your
dissociative experiences.
Other Changes in Awareness
Dissociation is strongly associated with other changes in awareness
that are common in everyone and are also found in other mental
disorders; thus, they are not unique to dissociative disorders. These
symptoms may be easily produced by fatigue, illness and stress,
and drugs or alcohol, and they are often only temporary. They
include not feeling present; spacing out; being very forgetful and
losing track of time; inability to concentrate or pay attention; being
so absorbed in an activity (for instance, reading a book or watching
a movie) that you do not notice what is going on around you;
daydreaming; imaginative involvement; trance-like behavior,
including “highway hypnosis”–driving so automatically that you do
not recall much of your trip and sometimes miss your exit; time
distortions; and low mental energy.
These symptoms may range from mild to severe, may be merely

an aggravation, or may seriously impair a person’s function, and
they may be more temporary or more chronic (Steele et al., 2009;
Van der Hart et al., 2006). People who have a dissociative disorder
often suffer from many of these changes in awareness to a serious
degree, in addition to symptoms related to dissociative parts of the
personality or self. In fact, each dissociative part may experience
variations of these problems with awareness, and the intrusion or
interference of dissociative parts may also result in some changes in
awareness.
EXPANSION OF THE LEARNING TO BE PRESENT
EXERCISE:
FINDING YOUR OWN ANCHORS TO THE PRESENT
You can expand the exercise from chapter 1, to be present in the here and
now, and tailor it to your specific needs. Practice this exercise in your own
home, finding anchors to the present in each room. Always begin this
exercise when you are rested, preferably during the day, as light helps you
stay more present. In fact, all new exercises should be practiced at times when
you are at your best, because this is when you are most able to learn from
them. Once you become more practiced, it will be easier to employ them
when you are stressed.
Walk around your home and in each room concentrate on
the various things you can see, the sounds you hear, the smells
you can smell, the things you might taste in the kitchen, the
things you can touch or hold. What is important is that you find
things that are neutral or pleasing to experience, that is, to see,
hear, touch, and that connect you to the present. For example,
look at a picture or poster on the wall, listen to music that you
like, taste something pleasant from the kitchen, and so on. For
each room, choose three things you can see, hear, feel, or
touch. Consider whether you might want to make a written list
of these anchors to have available when you need them,
because people often forget to use their anchors when they are
under stress. You may even ask someone to record a list of
these things for you on audiotape, so you can listen to them
when you feel stressed. The point is for you to concentrate on
objects that help you to realize that you are in the present, and
for you to have these available when you need to ground and
orient yourself in the present in your home. Thus, every room of
your home should now have anchors, familiar places or objects
that ground you and remind you to be present. When you are

having a hard time, use these anchors repeatedly to help keep
you, and all parts of you, in the safe present.
You might even want to buy a little something for yourself
that reminds you of being in the present and give it a special
place in your home, for example, a photo, a stone, a statue,
anything that may help you or parts inside to connect to the
present. Every time you look at it or pick it up, you remind
yourself that this object is from the present and you are here
and now with it. Some parts of your personality may find
different items more important or helpful for grounding than you
do. And some may not like something you choose. For
example, some parts who experience themselves as younger
may want to have something that adult parts may believe is
childish. Yet it is often these young parts that have the most
trouble staying present and need help in doing so. Try to be
inclusive and respectful, so that all parts of yourself get what
you need to feel safe and comfortable.
Note: As you search for anchors to the present in your home, you
may come across items that remind you of painful experiences in
the past. For the time being, put these away if you are able. You
can find specific suggestions about how to avoid or reduce these
traumatic reminders in chapter 15. Some objects may trigger
painful experiences for one part of you, but not for another; thus, it
is important to take into account the needs and feelings of all parts
as best you can when deciding whether to remove or avoid certain
items.

Homework Sheet 2.1
Recognizing Dissociative Symptoms
1. What was it like for you to read about dissociative symptoms?
a. Describe your thoughts, emotions, and/or physical sensations
as you read about the symptoms. For example, did you feel
relief, confusion, fear, shame?
b. Describe whether and how some of these symptoms may fit
your experience.
2. Circle any two dissociative symptoms that you may have noticed
in the past week:
Sense of fragmentation or division of self or personality
(may include some awareness of dissociative parts)
Amnesia in the present
Alienation from yourself or your body
Alienation from your surroundings
Experiencing too little: loss of functions
Experiencing too much: intrusions
Other changes in awareness
3. Describe your experience of each of these two symptoms and
how they affected your functioning at the time.
4. What have you done in the past that has helped you deal with
these dissociative experiences?
5. What dissociative symptoms would you most like help with?

Homework Sheet 2.2
List of Safe Anchors to the Present
Reread the instructions for finding anchors in your home.
1. Make a list below of anchors in each room of your home (for
example, bedroom, bathroom, living room, and kitchen). Notice
your experience when you think of these anchors.
2. Make a list of anchors in other places where it is important for
you to stay present, for example, in the car, in your therapist’s
office, or at work or school.

CHAPTER THREE
Understanding Dissociative Parts of
the Personality
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Discussion of homework
• Topic: Understanding Dissociative Parts of the Personality
Introduction
The Inner World of the Dissociative Individual
The Meaning and Functions of Specific Types of Parts
of the Personality
• Review of exercise on Developing Personal Anchors
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Continue to practice the Learning to Be Present
exercise.
Complete your list of anchors.
Complete Homework Sheet 3.1, Identifying
Dissociative Symptoms.
Complete Homework Sheet 3.2, Recognizing
Dissociative Parts of Yourself.
Note: This chapter contains a significant amount of material.
If you are using this manual in a group setting, it may be
helpful to take more than one session to cover the content.
Introduction
People with a complex dissociative disorder have a dissociative
organization of their personality that is comprised of two or more
dissociative parts, each having (at least somewhat) different

responses, feelings, thoughts, perceptions, physical sensations, and
behaviors. The inner world of these individuals involves
interactions among various parts of the personality, whether or not
within conscious awareness. Everyone’s personality, as we noted
before, is a complex dynamic system that, like all systems, involves
continuous actions and reactions, with parts of the system
interfacing for better or worse. Dissociative parts may take control
or influence the person as a whole to a greater or lesser extent. As
we have noted, these parts, no matter how separate they are
experienced, are not other “people” or full “personalities,” but
rather are manifestations of the way in which your single
personality is organized. You are still one person, although we
understand that you may not always feel that way.
The Inner World of the Dissociative Individual
Images of the “Inner World” of Dissociative Parts
Many people with a dissociative disorder (though not all) visualize
an inner space or world in which their parts reside, and they may
also visualize an image of a particular part. They may describe
inner scenes such as hallways with doors, houses with rooms, or
particular scenes in which parts “live,” such as a child huddled in
the corner, or a teenager with stringy hair who looks very angry.
These images are helpful because they can be changed
therapeutically to increase inner safety and communication. For
instance, rooms may have intercoms installed for better
communication, or the image of a warm blanket or stuffed toy
might be added to the picture of a child huddled in the corner to
increase a sense of safety and comfort.
The Basic Functions of Parts of the Personality
Although each person may have some unique features of his or her
dis​sociative parts, there are some typical underlying similarities in
the basic functions of parts. When people have been traumatized,
their personality is generally organized into at least two types of
parts based on functions. The first type of part is focused on dealing
with daily life and avoiding traumatic memories, while the second
type is stuck in past traumatic experiences and focused on defense
against threat (Van der Hart et al., 2006).

The part(s) of the personality that function in daily life often
comprise the major portion of the personality. Most people with
DDNOS have only a single part that functions in daily life, while
those with DID have more than one. This type of part usually
avoids dealing with or even acknowledging other parts, though it
may be influenced by them in various ways, which we will discuss
below. This part may avoid situations or experiences that might
evoke traumatic memories. Such avoidance originally helps people
cope with daily life while keeping painful (past) experiences at bay.
However, over time, it results in a life that becomes increasingly
limited.
While the part of the personality that copes with daily life is
avoidant, at least one other and usually more than one other part
remain “stuck” in traumatic memories and think, feel, perceive, and
behave as though these events are still happening (at least to a
degree) or are about to happen again. These parts are typically
stuck in repeating behaviors that are protective during threat, even
when they are not appropriate. For example, some parts fight to
protect even when you do not need such protection in the present,
others want to avoid or run away even though you are safe, some
freeze in fear, and others completely collapse. These parts are often
highly emotional, not very rational, limited in their thinking and
perceptions, not oriented to the present time, and are overwhelmed.
They primarily live in trauma-time, that is, they continue to
experience the traumatic past as the present, and hold emotions,
beliefs, sensations, and so forth that are related to traumatic
experiences.
Awareness of Parts for Each Other
Dissociative parts may have varying degrees of awareness for each
other. Some are not aware at all of other parts or are only aware of
a few other parts. One part may be aware of another, but not vice
versa. Some may be aware that other parts exist but do not
understand the meaning of those parts. Even when parts are aware
of each other’s existence, they often are not in agreement about
issues that are important to the person as a whole. One of your
goals in using this manual is to learn to develop skills for reaching
agreements among parts–which is different from forcing other parts
to comply with you or ignoring their needs.

The Influence of Parts on Each Other
Regardless of the degree to which parts are or are not aware of each
other, they do influence each other. Any part may intrude on and
influence the experience of the part that is functioning in daily life
without taking full control of functioning, an experience referred to
as passive influence (Kluft, 1987) or partial intrusion (Dell, 2002).
In the previous chapter we discussed briefly some of these intrusion
symptoms. You can be influenced by other parts in your thoughts,
feelings, body sensations, perceptions, urges, or behaviors. For
example, while in a store, people with a dissociative disorder may
hear an inner voice that says, “Get out, get out, it’s not safe in here!
You have to go home!” even though they know that nothing is
wrong. This is more than a wish, but rather a desperate inner voice
that comes from another part of the personality that may be
visualized as a terrified young child. Perhaps such individuals
might also hear or sense other inner voices that tell the child part to
shut up or that complain about how stupid they are to go shopping
because they do not need anything.
Such people may then feel confused, ashamed, and afraid of
what is happening inside themselves and might feel a sense of
impending doom, as though something terrible is about to happen.
And all the while, they remain aware that they are simply in a store
where everyone else is going about their business quite normally.
In addition, they may hear or sense interactions among several
inner parts so they feel like a bystander to a conversation or
argument in which they are not included.
These intrusions have a different quality than the normal
distress some people without a dissociative disorder may
experience in a crowded store (“This store is crowded and I am
eager to finish and leave”). Instead, it is as though a person with a
dissociative disorder has (at least) two completely different minds
that do not understand each other or are conversing about
completely different topics. These intrusions may seem so bizarre
or alien that you might have worried that you are insane, but this is
not the case. Even though you may not fully understand yet, other
parts of you have their own agendas, their own perceptions,
thoughts, feelings, wishes, needs, and so forth for good reasons.
Your challenge is to learn about and accept them without judgment,
even if you do not agree with them. Only from that point of
understanding can you make changes that support all parts in

working together more smoothly.
Executive Control
In some cases, especially in DID, one dissociative part may take
full control of your behavior in the world. The process of one part
taking over from another, often an involuntary event, is called
switching. If you experience switching, you may lose time when
another part of you is in control. Or perhaps you are aware of what
is happening, but it is as though you are watching and have no
control over your behavior. For example, one person lost time
whenever she was in a crowded store. She “came to” in her car with
all her groceries but could not remember buying them. Another
person experienced watching herself in the store as though she were
walking behind herself or seeing herself from above, outside her
body, wondering why she was being so slow in shopping. She
reported being back in her body once she returned to her car.
Most dissociative parts influence your experience from the
inside rather than exert complete control, that is, through passive
influence. In fact, many parts never take complete control of a
person, but are only experienced internally. Frequent switching
may be a sign of severe stress and inner conflict in most
individuals. However, for some patients with DID, switching in
daily life is common.
Elaboration and Autonomy of Parts
Parts of the personality may have a very wide range of elaboration
of their characteristics, and autonomy, that is, a sense of being
separate from other parts (Kluft, 1999, 2006; Putnam, 1997; Ross,
1997; Van der Hart et al., 2006). Some may have their own names,
ages, sex, and preferences, but not all of them. But each part does,
at the least, have a set of relatively limited memories, perceptions,
thoughts, emotions, and behaviors. A few parts may become quite
elaborated, with a much wider range of actions, skills, and more
complex sense of self, particularly in individuals with DID. For
example, a part may be active at work and also in social situations,
requiring very complex emotions, thoughts, behaviors, and sense of
self, while another part may only cry without words and feel afraid.
This latter part has a very limited repertoire of experiences,
behaviors, emotion, thoughts, and perceptions. Of course, most
people with dissociative disorders have a single main part of the

personality that is quite separate and complex, and which functions
in the world. As a general rule, the more parts, that is, the more
fragmented the personality, the more rigid and limited is the
experience of many (not all) such parts. The more active a part, the
more interactions with other people and with other parts, the more
this part may extend its own life history and activities. Parts also
vary in their degree of autonomy, that is, the degree to which they
are able to act on their own outside the control of other parts,
including gaining full or executive control (Chu, 1998; Kluft, 1999,
2006; Putnam, 1997; Ross, 1997; Van der Hart et al., 2006).
Number of Parts
People sometimes wonder how many parts they may have. The
actual number is not important in itself. It is significant only in that
the greater the fragmentation of the personality, the lower the
person’s integrative capacity tends to be. This usually means that
people who have “more” parts may need to work more in therapy
on increasing their capacity to integrate their experiences.
The Meaning and Functions of Specific Types of
Parts of the Personality
Parts of the personality have their own unique characteristics based
on their functions within the person as a whole. Their
characteristics, such as age, gender, emotional range, beliefs, and
behaviors indicate what still needs to be integrated for the whole
person. For example, a very young child part who calls for her
mother likely holds longings for love and care that the person as a
whole has found overwhelming, shameful, or otherwise
unacceptable. Because parts of the personality are representations,
they may take an infinite variety of forms, limited only by a
person’s experience and creativity. For example, a strong male part
in a female individual protected her when she was vulnerable in a
frightening situation, thus avoiding the realization that she was
actually helpless. Another person described a part as a bird. That
part could eventually be understood as a part that, in her
imagination, tried to fly away and escape when experiences were
overwhelming. Thus, the characteristics of a part are informative
but are not the important focus of therapy, and they should not be
taken literally. It is the meaning and function of what they represent

that is essential for you (and your therapist) to understand.
Parts of the Personality With Functions in Daily Life
As noted earlier, people with DDNOS have one major part of their
personality that functions in daily life, while those with DID have
more than one part active in the world, for example, parts that go to
work or take care of children. In extreme cases of DID, parts that
function in daily life are not aware of each other. More commonly,
there is some awareness, at least for many individuals, but also a
degree of avoidance. And most parts that function in daily life are
phobic of parts stuck in trauma-time.
Parts of the Personality That Hold Traumatizing Experiences
There are several typical types of parts of the personality that are
stuck in trauma-time. These parts are representations of common
conflicts and experiences that tend to be difficult to integrate.
Please note that the following descriptions are general and that the
examples that are given may not fit for you. It is important that you
accept your own inner experience as it is and not try to make it fit
any descriptions in this manual.
Young parts. Most people with a dissociative disorder who
experienced childhood trauma will have parts of the personality
that experience themselves as younger than the person’s actual age:
adolescents, child parts of primary school age, and even toddler or
infant parts. It is as though these parts are stuck in various
developmental time periods of the past. They often hold traumatic
memories, distressing, painful emotions or sensations, but
sometimes also have positive memories. They typically hold
unresolved feelings of longing, loneliness, dependency, and need
for comfort, help, and safety, and also of distrust and fear of
rejection or abandonment. These parts will be discussed more
thoroughly in chapter 25.
Of course, it is completely natural and understandable that
people who have been neglected or abused have these experiences
of need. At the same time it is common for other parts of
themselves to find these normal needs repulsive or dangerous,
because they have had negative past experiences with expressing
what they want or need. Thus, some parts of the personality reject
“needy” parts and have the belief that it is better to have no needs
and to be completely self-reliant. This sets up a typical inner

conflict between parts that need and parts that are fearful or
repulsed by those needs.
Helper parts. Some people with a dissociative disorder, but
certainly not all, have “helper” parts in their inner world that take
care of the well-being of other parts, an inner form of regulation
that can be a resource and basis for learning further self-soothing
skills. Sometimes helping parts are modeled on a kind person from
the past or on an appealing character from a book or movie or
television. These parts are the traumatized child’s attempt to soothe
and comfort himself or herself. For some people, the major part of
the personality who functions in daily life can learn to be quite
empathic and helpful for inner parts as well.
Parts that imitate people who hurt you. Usually there are parts
of the personality that hold anger and rage that are unacceptable or
very frightening to other parts. Some may resemble people from the
past who were abusive. These parts shame, threaten, or punish
other parts inside, or they may direct their anger to other people in
the outside world. Although the behavior of these parts can be quite
frightening or shameful, as well as unacceptable, it is important for
you to understand that these parts have good reason to exist and are
representations, and thus not the same as the people who hurt you.
They originally developed to protect you by containing many
distressful experiences of anger, helplessness, and sometimes guilt
or shame. Furthermore, their function often is to prevent other parts
behaving in a way that, in the past, evoked fear or shame. Over
time it is important to appreciate why they exist, even though their
“methods,” that is, their behavior and attitudes, may not be
acceptable. Your fear and shame about these parts must be
overcome in order for you to heal. These parts, like all parts of
yourself, need to become part of an internal “team” that collaborate
and represent you as the whole person and your own history. And
once they do so, you will be surprised at what tremendous help they
will be to you. These parts are further discussed in chapter 22.
Fight parts. Some angry parts are stuck in a fight defense
against threat. They have the explicit function of protecting the
individual by means of fight responses, either toward other people
or toward parts inside that in some way evoke a sense of threat.
Fight parts often believe that they are strong, have not been hurt,
and are capable of carrying out strong aggressive reactions to
perceived threat or disrespectful behavior. Often they view

themselves as a “tough” child or teenager or a large, strong man.
Ashamed parts. Shame is a major emotion that maintains
dissociation (see chapter 24 on shame). Some parts of the
personality are especially avoided and reviled because they hold
experiences, feelings, or behaviors that you, or some parts of you,
have labeled as shameful or disgusting. You will need to be
especially empathic and accepting toward these parts of yourself.
A central problem for people who have a dissociative disorder
is that parts of the personality avoid each other and their painful
memories and experiences, or they tend to have strong conflicts
with each other. In the literature this has been described as phobia
of dissociative parts (Van der Hart et al., 2006). Parts typically feel
fearful, ashamed, or repulsed by other parts. In particular,
dissociative parts that function in daily life want as little as possible
to do with dissociative parts that are fixed in traumatic experiences.
Parts stuck in trauma-time often feel abandoned and neglected by
the parts that try to move on without them in daily life.
These ongoing inner conflicts can be painful and frightening,
and they cost a person with a dissociative disorder a tremendous
amount of energy. As we said before, all parts need to learn to
accept and cooperate with each other. After all, in order to adapt
and be at our best, we must learn to accept ourselves and all our
aspects. Only in acknowledging and accepting are we able to make
positive changes in ourselves.
However, we are aware that getting to know yourself and
working more cooperatively internally can be a long and difficult
process. You cannot expect yourself to immediately function
differently when parts have spent a lifetime avoiding each other or
being in conflict. Please remember that you will need much
patience and self-acceptance in this work and go at your own pace.
Remember to be empathic and accepting of yourself as a whole
person.
The following exercises that help you to stay in the present can
be useful to the parts stuck in the past, especially finding “anchors”
in the present.

Homework Sheet 3.1
Identifying Dissociative Symptoms
1. Circle two dissociative symptoms that you may have had in the
past week:
Sense of fragmentation or division of self or personality
(may include some awareness of dissociative parts)
Alienation from yourself/not feeling real
Alienation from your surroundings
Experiencing too little/loss of function, for example,
amnesia
Experiencing too much/intrusions
2. Describe your experiences of these symptoms and how they
affected your functioning at the time.
3. What have you done in the past that has helped you deal with
these dissociative experiences?

Homework Sheet 3.2
Recognizing Dissociative Parts of Yourself
There are various ways in which you can notice parts of yourself.
For example, consider the following:
• You have lost time and you discover that something has been
done that only you could have done, yet you have no memory
of it.
• You hear yourself talking, but it seems as though the thoughts
or words you hear are not your “own” and you have no
control over what you say.
• You experience yourself as outside your body, as though you
are looking at someone else.
• You have body sensations that do not feel they belong to you
or that seem to come “out of the blue” and do not fit with
your present situation. Sometimes these sensations are
accompanied by feelings of fear or panic.
• You have thoughts or emotions that you experience as
sudden, not appropriate to the situation, or as not belonging
to you.
• You hear voices in your head that talk to you or to each other.
• You find yourself in a place and have no idea how you got
there.
• You feel your body, your movements, or behaviors are not
within your control.
1. Describe one example of noticing the (inner or external) actions
of another part of yourself. How did you become aware of this
part?
2. Describe what you understand about your own internal
organization of parts. For example, how do parts of yourself seem
to interact, if at all? Which parts do you avoid or are avoided by
other parts of you? What emotions are held in parts of yourself?
Are there parts you feel more comfortable with? Less comfortable?
Do some of your parts communicate with each other?

CHAPTER FOUR
Symptoms of Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder (PTSD) in Complex
Dissociative Disorders
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: Symptoms of PTSD in Complex Dissociative
Disorders
Introduction
What Is PTSD?
What Are the Symptoms of PTSD?
DID and DDNOS as Complex Posttraumatic Stress
Disorders
Optional Reading: Complex PTSD and Dissociation
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 4.1, Identifying PTSD
Symptoms.
Complete Homework Sheet 4.2, My Coping Skills for
PTSD Symptoms.
Complete Homework Sheet 4.3, Repeat Practice:
Learning to Identify and Cope With Dissociative Parts
of Yourself.
Practice the Stress Reduction and Healing exercise
from this chapter at least once a day.
Introduction

Trauma-related disorders have extensive overlap in symptoms, so it
is possible for a person to fit several diagnostic categories. This
does not mean more is wrong with you; rather, it speaks to the fact
that descriptions of trauma-related disorders are not very precise
and have a lot of overlap. In this chapter we will discuss some of
the most basic and common symptoms of trauma-related disorders,
those of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Dissociative
disorders are considered to be more complex forms of PTSD that
arise when traumatizing events affect a child’s normal personality
development, and in fact, many PTSD symptoms involve
dissociation. Thus, it is likely that you have had or currently
experience some symptoms of PTSD. Once you understand these
symptoms, you can work to overcome them with some practical
skills.
What Is PTSD?
PTSD involves a set of symptoms that arise after a traumatizing
event (or many events). These symptom groups include avoidance,
intrusion of traumatic memories, and physiological dysregulation.
These symptoms will be discussed further later on in this chapter.
Posttraumatic stress symptoms develop some time after a
traumatizing event. For example, PTSD is commonly seen in many
victims of war, rape, and natural disasters. People with PTSD often
also experience depression, substance abuse, and physical
complaints. Some professionals have proposed a diagnosis called
Complex PTSD, which is a category that fits somewhere between
PTSD and dissociative disorders (Herman, 1992; Pelcovitz, Van
der Kolk, Roth, Mandel, Kaplan, & Resick, 1997; Van der Hart,
Nijenhuis, & Steele, 2005). If you like, you may read more about
that proposed diagnosis in the optional reading material at the end
of the chapter.
What Are the Symptoms of PTSD?
Basic symptoms of PTSD include three core groupings:
• Intrusions of traumatic experiences (for instance, flashbacks,
nightmares)
• Avoidance, numbing, and detachment

• Hyperarousal (startle reflex, anxiety, fear, agitation)
Intrusion Symptoms
• Flashbacks, that is, reliving some or all of a traumatizing
event as though it is happening in the present. Flashbacks can
involve images, smells, sounds, taste, emotions, thoughts,
and physical sensations.
• Nightmares of traumatizing events or of similar content
• Hallucinations, delusions, or illusions that are related to
traumatizing events
• Severe, recurring anxiety reactions or panic, with heart
palpitations, rapid breathing, sweating and trembling, and
sense of impending doom
• Feeling paralyzed with fear or wanting to run away
These reactions mainly occur in situations that remind (trigger)
you of a past traumatizing event, or rather some part of yourself
that is “stuck” in that original situation, that is, living in trauma-
time (Van der Hart, Nijenhuis, & Solomon, 2010). Thus, that part
responds to these reminders with the same sense of overwhelming
threat as was the case in the past.
Avoidance Symptoms
• Strong efforts to avoid any thoughts, feelings, or situations
that might evoke traumatic memories, for example, by
focusing too much on work, excessive cleaning, staying too
busy, using drugs or alcohol, or spacing out
• Amnesia, that is, inability to recall some or all of significant
aspects of traumatizing events
• Emotional numbness
• Inability to enjoy life or feel love
• Feeling as though you are on automatic pilot
• Isolation and avoidance of other people
• Reluctance to talk about traumatic experiences
Hyperarousal Symptoms
• Persistent physical symptoms of tension: tenseness, agitation,

restlessness, impatience, and feeling constantly on the alert
• Jumpiness, easily startled, and hypersensitivity to what is
going on around you
• Irritability, outbursts of anger or rage
• Emotional outbursts
• Serious difficulty falling asleep or frequent waking
• Concentration and attention problems
Our bodies and minds are innately prepared to deal with
emergency threat situations by automatically shutting down certain
activities and enhancing others. For example, digestion is slowed
down, heart rate and breathing increase, blood rushes to the brain
and limbs, and our muscles tense to prepare for running away or
fighting. We shift from a “normal, everyday” state in which we
love, learn, work, and play, to one of high alertness that involves
hypervigilance, fight, flight, and/or freeze. Activity shifts from the
parts of our brain that help us think through complex problems to
the parts of the brain that help us react in life-threatening situations
during which there is probably not enough time to think about
options. These automatic actions can help us survive threat in the
same way that animals of prey use them to survive a predator.
Unfortunately, when dissociation occurs, parts of the personality
can become stuck or fixed in being hyperaroused. When these parts
are activated, you will experience symptoms of hyperarousal.
Hypoarousal Symptoms
Although hypoarousal symptoms are not currently included in the
symptoms of PTSD, there has been increasing awareness and
acceptance of the fact that some people experience a kind of
dissociative shutdown in response to trauma, rather than
hyperarousal (Lanius et al., 2010). In fact, most people with PTSD
alternate between these two physiological conditions, both of which
many experts consider to be dissociative. We humans are very
much like mammals in our reactions to danger. In addition to
hyperarousal, we–like our animal cousins–have a line of defense
that involves hypoarousal. It is an automatic, unconscious
physiological strategy to help ensure survival when there are no
other options available. Heart rate and breathing slow drastically,
muscle tone becomes limp, and our mind and bodies go into a kind
of deep hibernation. We conserve energy by going into this

automatic state of “collapse,” sometimes called “death feigning” in
animals. Opossums do this when they “play dead.”
Symptoms of posttraumatic hypoarousal include the following:
• Emotional numbness
• Physical numbness, inability to feel pain
• Blank mind, unable to think or speak
• Profound detachment
• Inability to move or respond
• Extreme drowsiness and even temporary loss of
consciousness
Just as with hyperarousal, hypoarousal reactions may be due to the
intrusion of a part of the self that is chronically in this physical
condition. Usually these parts are triggered when hyperaroused
parts can no longer be effective or become exhausted.
DID and DDNOS as Complex Posttraumatic Stress
Disorders
DID and DDNOS are considered to be complex trauma-related
disorders on a continuum with PTSD. Thus, most people with a
complex dissociative disorder have a degree of chronic
posttraumatic stress symptoms. Each part of the personality may be
stuck in a particular group of PTSD symptoms. For example, some
parts that are fixated in traumatic memories are chronically
hyperaroused, while others are extremely shut down (hypoaroused).
Some parts, usually those functioning in daily life, are avoidant and
emotionally constricted, or sometimes are irritable and impatient,
depressed, and have nightmares and other intrusive symptoms. The
work you accomplish with this manual will help you develop a
strong foundation for resolving these posttraumatic stress
symptoms.
STRESS REDUCTION AND HEALING EXERCISE
When you have posttraumatic stress symptoms, it is important to learn how to
reduce your stress and feel calmer and more present. The exercise that
follows, or a variation that you create yourself, may be helpful to you.
You will need a stress ball, also sometimes called a squeeze ball—a small

soft ball that fits in the palm of your hand and which you can squeeze. These
are very inexpensive and are readily available in a wide variety of stores or
online. You will also need a small object to hold in your hand that represents
healing and calm for yourself. Perhaps this may be one of your anchoring
items, which you developed earlier, or a rock, a stuffed animal, a book—
whatever you can hold in your hand and that feels right to you.
Find a position that feels comfortable, preferably sitting or
standing, both feet on the floor. If you are standing, place your
feet slightly apart, in line with your shoulders and keep your
knees slightly bent, that is, do not lock your knees. Begin the
exercise by holding a stress ball in your nondominant hand (for
the right-handed person, this is the left hand and vice versa).
Concentrate your attention on your nondominant hand.
Squeeze the ball as hard as possible while you imagine that
you are letting all the tension and unpleasant feelings converge
from all over your body and begin to flow toward your arm,
down your arm, down into you hand, and then flow through your
hand into the ball. You can visualize the ball as working like a
magnet, drawing all the tension towards it, through your
shoulder and your arm, your hand and fingers. Watching the
ball and noticing your squeezing motions may help you stay
focused and present. When the ball is saturated like a sponge
with your tension and unpleasant feelings, you can open your
hand and let go of the ball, allowing all your tension to be held
in the ball, away from you. As soon as you let go of the ball, the
tension leaves it and dissipates into the air, disappearing from
the room. You can practice this exercise several times until you
feel that all negative tension has been released out of your
body. You might remind all parts of yourself that they are also
welcome to use the ball to release their tension, too.
When you feel calmer and less stressed, let go of the ball
one last time and turn your attention to your dominant hand
(that is, the hand that you use most often; for most people, this
will be the right hand), and follow the suggestions below.
Choose an object that you can easily hold in your hand, and
which symbolizes a sense of well-being or healing for you,
perhaps one of your anchors to the present. Hold this object in
your dominant hand. Imagine that this object holds all the well-
being and healing that you need: a sense of safety and
contentment, of peace and calm, of mental and emotional
clarity, free of tension and conflict. Now allow these feelings of
well-being and healing to radiate warmly and gently from the
object through your hand, your arm, your shoulder, all through
your body. Allow it to gently flow through your body, your mind,

and your heart. All parts of you can take in this well-being and
healing in their own way, in a way that works for them. With
each breath in, allow more well-being and healing to flow
through you. With each out breath, let any remaining tension
go.
Whenever you wish to remind yourself of this sense of well-
being, your dominant hand can automatically recall the feeling
of the object, its shape and texture, its temperature and color,
and you can fully experience those positive feelings and
sensations of well-being and healing once again. As you
practice more, your dominant hand can almost automatically
close as though holding the object of your healing, and at any
time you wish or need, you can once again experience that
sense of well-being and healing.

Homework Sheet 4.1
Identifying PTSD Symptoms
Check or underline any PTSD symptoms that you might have
recently experienced. If you are not currently experiencing any
symptoms, circle those you have had in the past.
Intrusion Symptoms
• Flashbacks, that is, reliving some or all of a traumatizing
event as though it is happening now. Flashbacks can involve
images, smells, sounds, taste, emotions, thoughts, and
physical sensations.
• Nightmares
• Hallucinations, delusions, or illusions that derive from
traumatizing events
• Severe, recurring anxiety reactions or panic
• Feeling paralyzed with fear or wanting to run away
Avoidance Symptoms
• Strong efforts to avoid any thoughts, feelings, or situations
that might evoke traumatic memories, for example, by
focusing too much on work, excessive cleaning, staying very
busy, using drugs or alcohol
• Amnesia, that is, inability to recall some or all of significant
aspects of traumatizing events
• Emotional numbness
• Inability to enjoy life or to feel love
• Feeling as though you are on automatic pilot
• Isolation
• Unwillingness to talk about your experience, shutting
yourself off from others
Hyperarousal Symptoms
• Persistent physical symptoms of tension: tenseness, agitation,
restlessness, lack of patience, and feeling constantly on the

alert
• Jumpiness, easily startled, and hypersensitivity to what is
going on around you
• Irritability, episodes of rage or crying
• Difficulty falling asleep or frequent waking
• Concentration and attention problems
Hypoarousal Symptoms
• Physical numbness, inability to feel pain
• Blank mind, unable to think or speak
• Profound detachment
• Inability to move or respond
• Extreme drowsiness and even temporary loss of
consciousness

Homework Sheet 4.2
My Coping Skills for PTSD Symptoms
You have probably been living with trauma-related symptoms for a
large part of your life, and you have likely already discovered
certain things that can be of help. For example, perhaps you call a
friend, write or use art, take a walk, go shopping, meditate, or
exercise. Make a list some of the helpful ways you have learned to
cope with these symptoms. You can add more strategies as you
learn them over time.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Homework Sheet 4.3
Repeat Practice: Learning to Identify and Cope With
Dissociative Parts of Yourself
This homework sheet is meant to help you practice more of what
you learned in chapters 2 and 3.
1. Describe an experience of noticing a part of your personality
(this may be some inner experience, such as hearing a voice, or a
situation in which another part was active in the world).
2. What was your reaction to this part of you? (For example, what
did you think, feel, sense, or do?)
3. What might help you become more accepting of this part? (For
example, you might try understanding why this part of you feels a
certain way, or know that you can get help in working with this part
from your therapist.)
Optional Reading: Complex PTSD and Dissociation
Some clinicians who work extensively with PTSD have found that
many trauma survivors who experienced chronic interpersonal
traumatization tend to have more problems and symptoms than
those who only have PTSD and who have experienced a single
trauma. They thus proposed a new diagnostic category, sometimes
referred to Complex PTSD or disorders of extreme stress, not
otherwise specified (DESNOS; Herman, 1992; Pelcovitz et al.,
1997). This diagnosis is not yet included in the DSM or ICD.
People with complex dissociative disorders typically suffer from at
least some of the symptoms of Complex PTSD described in the
next section. As noted earlier, this proposed diagnosis falls
somewhere in the middle of a continuum of trauma-related
disorders, between PTSD and the currently recognized dissociative
disorders in DSM-IV. For those with a dissociative disorder, various
parts of the personality may have these symptoms, and they may be

experienced by you, the person as a whole.
Symptoms of Complex PTSD
Complex PTSD consists of six symptom clusters, which also have
been described in terms of dissociation of the personality (Van der
Hart et al., 2005). Of course, people who receive this diagnosis
often also suffer from other problems as well and diagnostic
categories may overlap significantly (Dorrepaal et al., 2008). The
symptom clusters are described next.
Alterations in Regulation of Affect (Emotion) and Impulses
Almost all people who are seriously traumatized have problems in
tolerating and regulating their emotions and urges or impulses.
However, those with Complex PTSD and dissociative disorders
tend to have more difficulties than those with PTSD because
disruptions in their early development have inhibited their ability to
regulate themselves. The fact that you have a dissociative
organization of your personality makes you highly vulnerable to
rapid and unexpected changes in emotions and sudden impulses.
Various parts of the personality intrude on each other either through
passive influence or switching (see chapter 3) when you are under
stress, resulting in dysregulation. Merely having an emotion, such
as anger, may evoke other parts of you to feel fear or shame, and to
engage in impulsive behaviors to stop or avoid the feelings.
Changes in Attention and Consciousness
People with Complex PTSD suffer from more severe and frequent
dissociative symptoms, as well as memory and attention problems
than those with simple PTSD. In addition to amnesia due to the
activity of various parts of the self, people may experience
difficulties with concentration, attention, other memory problems,
and general spaciness. These symptoms often accompany
dissociation of the personality, but they are also common in people
who do not have dissociative disorders. For example, almost
everyone can be spacey, absorbed in an activity, or miss an exit on
the highway. When various parts of the personality are active, by
definition, a person experiences some kind of abrupt change in
attention and consciousness.
Changes in the Perception of Self

People who have been traumatized in childhood are often troubled
by guilt, shame, and negative feelings about themselves, such as the
belief that they are unlikable, unlovable, stupid, inept, dirty,
worthless, lazy, and so forth. In complex dissociative disorders
there are typically particular parts that contain these negative
feelings about the self while other parts may evaluate themselves
quite differently. Alternations among parts thus may result in rather
rapid and distinct changes in self-perception (Van der Hart et al.,
2005).
Changes in Relationships With Others
It is especially hard to trust other people if you have been
repeatedly abused, abandoned, or betrayed as a child. Mistrust
makes it very difficult to make friends, and to be able to distinguish
between the good and bad intentions in other people. Some parts do
not seem to trust anyone, while other parts may be so vulnerable
and needy that they do not pay attention to clues that perhaps a
person is not trustworthy. Some parts like to be close to others or
feel a desperate need to be close and taken care of, while other parts
fear being close or actively dislike people. Some parts are afraid of
being in relationships, while others are afraid of being rejected or
criticized. This naturally sets up major internal as well as relational
conflicts.
Somatic (Physical) Symptoms
People with Complex PTSD often have medically unexplained
physical symptoms such as abdominal pains, headaches, joint and
muscle pain, stomach problems, and elimination problems. These
people are sometimes most unfortunately mislabeled as
hypochondriacs or as exaggerating their physical problems. But
these problems are real, even though they may not be related to a
specific physical diagnosis. Some dissociative parts that are stuck
in past experiences that involved pain may intrude such that a
person experiences “unexplained” pain or other physical symptoms.
And more generally, chronic stress affects the body in all kind of
ways, just as it does the mind. In fact, the mind and body cannot be
separated. Unfortunately, the connection between current physical
symptoms and past traumatizing events is not always so clear to
either the individual or the physician, at least for a while. At the
same time, we know that people who have suffered chronic trauma

are much more likely than the average person to suffer from serious
medical problems. It is therefore very important that you have
physical symptoms checked out, to make sure you do not have a
problem for which you need medical help.
Changes in Meaning
Finally, chronically traumatized people lose faith that good things
can happen and people can be kind and trustworthy. They feel
hopeless, often believing that the future will be as bad as the past,
or that they will not live long enough to experience a good future.
People who have a dissociative disorder may have different sets of
meaning in various dissociative parts. Some parts may be relatively
balanced in their worldview, others may be despairing, believing
the world to be a completely negative, dangerous place, while other
parts might maintain an unrealistic optimistic outlook on life.

PART ONE
SKILLS REVIEW
You have learned a number of skills in this section of the manual.
Below you will find a review of those skills and an opportunity to
develop them further. As you review, we encourage you to return to
the chapters to read them again and repractice the homework a little
at a time. Remember that regular, daily practice is essential to learn
new skills.
For each skill set below, answer the following questions:
1. In what situation(s) did you practice this skill?
2. How did this skill help you?
3. What, if any, difficulties have you had in practicing this
skill?
4. What additional help or resources might you need to feel
more successful in mastering this skill?
Chapter 1, Learning to Be Present Exercise
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 2, Developing and Using Anchors in the Present
1.
2.

3.
4.
Chapter 4, Stress Reduction and Relaxation Exercise (With Stress
Ball)
1.
2.
3.
4.

PART TWO
Initial Skills for Coping With
Dissociation

CHAPTER FIVE
Overcoming the Phobia of Inner
Experience
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: Overcoming the Phobia of Inner Experience
Introduction
Understanding the Phobia of Inner Experience
Why People Develop a Phobia of Inner Experience
The Need to Overcome the Phobia of Inner Experience
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 5.1, Becoming Aware of
Avoiding Inner Experience
Introduction
Our inner experience is that which we think, feel, remember,
perceive, sense, decide, plan, and predict. These experiences are
actually mental actions, or mental activity (Van der Hart et al.,
2006). Mental activity, in which we engage all the time, may or
may not be accompanied by behavioral actions. It is essential that
you become aware of, learn to tolerate and regulate, and even
change major mental actions that affect your current life, such as
negative beliefs, and feelings or reactions to the past that interfere
with the present. However, it is impossible to change inner
experiences if you are avoiding them because you are afraid,
ashamed, or disgusted by them. Serious avoidance of your inner

experiences is called experiential avoidance (Hayes, Wilson,
Gifford, & Follette, 1996), or the phobia of inner experience
(Steele, Van der Hart, & Nijenhuis, 2005; Van der Hart et al.,
2006). In this chapter you will learn about the phobia of inner
experience and build a foundation of skills to overcome it.
Understanding the Phobia of Inner Experience
Most people think of phobias as a fear and avoidance of something
external such as spiders, heights, or flying. But some people can be
equally terrified of a feeling like rage or sadness, of a thought or
wish, or a prediction that if they try something new it will fail, or
even of physical sensations such as the rapid heart beat and
difficulty breathing that accompany panic. Such a phobia of inner
experience may involve shame or disgust in addition to fear
(Hayes, Follette, & Linehan, 2004; Van der Hart et al., 2006). The
phobia of inner experience is a serious problem, contributing to
ongoing psychological stress and inhibition of pleasant or
spontaneous activities (Kashdana, Barrios, Forsyth, & Steger,
2006).
For example, people may be intensely ashamed of feeling rage,
because they believe that emotion could only belong to a “bad”
person, or because they fear the consequences of expressing it.
They feel enraged, and instead of being able to deal with the anger,
they increase their misery by giving themselves negative labels:
Their misery has thus become compounded. Subsequently, they
avoid anger and situations that might evoke anger, and any time
they begin to feel angry, they recoil in shame and disgust. Other
people may have intense fantasies of being cared for, yet feel very
afraid, ashamed, and disgusted by these wishes, because they have
negative beliefs that being “needy” or “dependent” is weak and not
normal, again creating more inner distress and preventing them
from accepting important needs.
Many individuals with a dissociative disorder are afraid of inner
voices that come from other parts of themselves. They label
themselves as “crazy” and feel ashamed and afraid of these voices.
Such feelings are sometimes intensified if they have been labeled
psychotic or “crazy” by mental health professionals or others who
did not understand the dissociative nature of the voices.
Some inner experiences may feel so threatening that almost any

means of avoidance or escape may be used, no matter how
destructive. Perhaps you avoid your inner experience by working
too much, so you do not have to pay attention to yourself, as
Marilyn Van Derbur, a survivor of child abuse, noted: “That was
my survival mechanism, staying so busy there was not time to have
unthinkable memories surface” (2004, p. 45). Other avoidance
behaviors might include using drugs or alcohol or other addictive
behavior, increasing self-criticism, withdrawing from others, or
blaming others for your inner problems. Of course, each
dissociative part of yourself is a part of your inner experience that
you likely avoid, even to the point of not feeling or knowing it is
“your” experience.
Avoidance can be conscious or unconscious. We will begin by
helping you be more aware of the ways in which you avoid inner
experience in conscious ways. Once you become more comfortable
in noticing how you consciously avoid your inner experience, you
gradually can begin to feel more secure to focus on some inner
experiences of which you may not yet be aware. For example, you
may become more aware that you cringe and feel fear when you
hear an inner voice, but you may not yet know much about why
that voice exists or what that part of you experiences.
Why People Develop a Phobia of Inner Experience
Generally the phobia of inner experience develops for three
different reasons. First, many people who were traumatized early in
life did not get much help in learning how to understand and cope
with typical intense inner experiences such as overwhelming
emotions. They received too little help and reassurance from
caretakers. Thus, they feel easily overwhelmed, simply because
they do not understand these experiences and feel they are not
controllable.
Second, people tend to evaluate their inner experience as
“good” or “bad.” They go on to label themselves in the same way:
“Anger is bad and dangerous, so if I feel anger, I must be bad and
dangerous;” “Only people who are unlovable and worthless feel
shame; so if I feel shame it means I am a failure and unlovable.” Of
course, we all want what is good and pleasant, and we want to
avoid what is painful, just as we want to be good people, not bad
ones. But our inner experiences are not what make us good or bad;

they are just a natural part of everyone’s internal world.
Finally, certain inner experiences serve as reminders of past
traumatic experiences or as signals that something terrible is about
to happen. For example, when people, or some dissociative parts of
themselves, feel anxious, the emotion and physical sensations may
immediately remind them, even if only on an unconscious level, of
the fear they felt when they were being hurt in the past. They thus
try to avoid feeling anxious so as not to be reminded of unresolved
traumatic memories. Others might perceive an inner experience as a
signal that something is about to go wrong. For instance, a person
who feels sadness may believe or merely sense that this emotion
precedes an overwhelming experience of despair, lack of comfort,
and aloneness. Thus, sadness is avoided to prevent the other
expected and really difficult experience from occurring. The
painful paradox is that what is fearfully anticipated and avoided
would not likely take place if the present feeling of sadness is
accepted and calmly experienced.
The Need to Overcome the Phobia of Inner
Experience
It is completely understandable that you might want to avoid
certain inner experiences that are related to past traumatizing
events. Yet healing requires you to work with these inner
experiences in order to understand and change them. And you
cannot change that which you avoid or do not know. Although it
may be difficult, it is essential for you to learn how to accept,
understand, regulate, and cope with all of your inner experiences.
Inner experiences have good reason to exist and should not be
judged as “good” or “bad.” Everyone has internal experiences;
some are more congruent with who you want to be, others less so.
Some are more comfortable, others are not. Some are more under
your control, others occur spontaneously. All humans have this
wide range of inner experiences. Everyone gets angry, feels afraid,
ashamed, or incompetent at times. If you are able to tolerate those
feelings and their accompanying thoughts and sensations, you can
begin to learn to sit back and understand a bit more about them, and
thus what to do about them. Otherwise you remain a captive of
your inner experience, with it in control of you.
Your work in your therapy and with this manual can help you

learn to accept your inner experiences without judgment, including
dissociative parts of yourself. In fact, this entire manual is geared
toward helping you begin to overcome your phobia of various
aspects of your inner experience and to feel less vulnerable and
more comfortable as a whole person. You will learn much more
about how to approach your inner experiences in the next chapter.

Homework Sheet 5.1
Becoming Aware of Avoiding Inner Experience
Each day this week try to notice a time when you consciously avoid
some type of inner experience. You do not have to make yourself
stop avoiding it, but just notice what you are avoiding and under
what circumstances you avoid it. For example, perhaps you want to
avoid a feeling of anger, a thought that things are hopeless, or the
sound of a dissociative part crying or criticizing you.
Name one inner experience (emotion, thought, sensation,
memory, fantasy, etc.) of which you are a little afraid or ashamed.
Imagine that you put your fear or shame on a scale of 1 to 10, with
1 being very little and 10 being very much. Choose an experience
that is closer to 1 or 2, so that you will not get overwhelmed.
Complete the following questions for each day of the week:
1. What inner experience did you avoid or want to avoid?
2. What were your beliefs or concerns about what might happen if
you allowed yourself to accept that inner experience?
3. What did you do to avoid the experience?
4. What help or resources do you imagine you might need in order
to be less avoidant of this inner experience?
Example
1. I avoided feelings of sadness, I don’t like to cry and I can’t think when
I am crying. There is a part of me inside that cries all the time. I hate
hearing it. I just want to get away from that sound and feeling.
2. If I give in to being sad, I am afraid I will get so depressed that I
cannot work. I’d like to get rid of that crying part of me. Nobody likes
a crybaby.
3. I just worked and worked and kept busy all week so I didn’t have time
to think about it or feel anything.
4. I need help to feel safer with being sad. I am so afraid that I will never

stop crying.
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday

CHAPTER SIX
Learning to Reflect
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: Learning to Reflect
Introduction
Reflection: Empathic Understanding of Yourself and
Others
Example of Reflective Functioning
Problems With Reflection for People With a Complex
Dissociative Disorder
Retrospective Reflection
Tips for Developing Reflective Skills
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 6.1, Learning to Reflect.
Complete Homework Sheet 6.2, Reflecting on Your
Inner Experience in the Present.
Continue practicing the Learning to Be Present and
Developing Your Anchors exercises from chapters 1
and 2.
Introduction
The empathic understanding of yourself and others involves the
ability to reflect, also known as reflective functioning. This skill is
defined more generally as the ability to consider our inner
experience and make sense of it. A specific type of reflective

functioning, called mentalizing, is the ability to accurately infer our
own motivations and intentions, as well as those of others (Fonagy
& Target, 1997). Reflection is an essential skill in learning to
overcome the phobia of inner experience. In this chapter you will
learn how to reflect on your own experience as well as how to
reflect accurately on other people’s intentions toward you.
Reflection: Empathic Understanding of Yourself and
Others
Reflection helps us understand our own reactions rather than just
being in the middle of them, and reflection supports us in changing
automatic reactions to chosen responses. It also helps us more
accurately predict what another person might be feeling, thinking,
and what he or she is likely to do next in a relationship. When we
can understand and predict ourselves and others, we naturally feel
more secure and more “in sync” with those for whom we care. In
other words, reflective skills involve the capacity to make sense of
our own minds and the minds of others (Allen, Fonagy, &
Bateman, 2008; Fonagy, Gergely, Jurist, & Target, 2002).
Most animals simply react to emotions and impulses. Their
emotions direct their behaviors: Anger evokes fight or attack,
hunger evokes a search for food, fear evokes freezing or running
away, and so forth. With a very few exceptions—such as some
primates, elephants, and dolphins—animals do not seem to have
self-awareness. But as humans with self-aware minds, we have the
opportunity to add richness to our experience by understanding the
meaning of our mental activities, challenging narrow beliefs, and
changing how we respond to what we hold in mind, and to what we
believe others are thinking, feeling, or perceiving. We take in what
we perceive and make sense of it based on our accumulated
experiences, knowledge, and beliefs, and on our needs and goals.
Reflection helps us understand the nature of feelings, our
patterns of thoughts, our emotional reactions, and our habitual
movements, so that we can change them and act in ways that are
more effective. Reflection also helps us realize that other people
also have their own minds and their own needs and goals, which
may involve quite different perceptions, thoughts, feelings,
motivations, and intentions than we have. Of course, we cannot
“read” people’s minds by assuming we know what is there, but we

can make some fairly accurate predictions based on our experience
of that individual person. We can weigh different alternatives and
points of view.
Example of Reflective Functioning
Imagine that you are startled by someone walking into the room
unexpectedly, and you react with terror and panic, convinced you
are going to be hurt. This reaction is not reflective, but rather
automatic, that is, prereflective (Van der Hart et al., 2006). If you
can reflect, you are not just stuck in this terror, in the grip of your
feeling, and behaving fearfully. Rather you are able to step back
from the situation a bit and observe that your fear is not
proportional or even appropriate to what is happening. Instead of
just feeling or thinking without awareness, you notice what you feel
and think, how you experience those feelings and thoughts in your
body, and perhaps why you feel and think a certain way. This is
reflective functioning. You can learn to acknowledge and accept
the feeling, having some empathy for yourself: “I am feeling very
afraid right now. Let me take some breaths and slow myself down.
It’s OK that I have this feeling even though I know I am safe.” You
can learn to observe that the person who entered the room has no
expression of malice, and in fact, is not even focused on you. You
remind yourself that this person is known to you and would not hurt
you. You can consciously relax your body. You can give yourself
time to sort out why you might be feeling so very scared. Is it
something from the past? Is there a dissociative part of yourself that
is reacting without much awareness of the present? You can work
on calming yourself down and using the fearful experience to learn
more about your patterns of emotion, thought, and behavior.
Problems With Reflection for People With a
Complex Dissociative Disorder
Reflective functioning is a learned skill. Children learn it over time
when their caregivers are sufficiently attuned to their feelings and
needs, and it can help them be curious about their mind and how it
works. Unfortunately, these reflective skills are often absent to a
large degree in dysfunctional and abusive families, where

caregivers typically do not have these skills to pass on to their
children. So you may not have had much experience with self
reflection or reflecting on others. But like any skill, reflection can
be learned. However, it is not always easy: Reflection takes more
energy and mental work than automatic reactions, especially as you
are just beginning to learn. But be patient and persistent, and it will
become a natural part of your coping.
Reflective Functioning Can Be Impeded by Dissociation
As we explained in previous chapters (chapters 2 and 3), people
with a complex dissociative disorder experience a division in their
self or personality and, as a result, have conflicting and alternating
experiences and perceptions of themselves and others. They may be
influenced by wishes, needs, emotions, thoughts, and so forth, that
emerge from other parts of self, and they may be relatively unaware
of these parts. Thus, their inner experience seems arbitrary,
inconsistent, and confusing, making reflection more difficult than
usual. As we explained earlier, people may be very phobic of their
inner experiences, including dissociative parts of self. This phobic
reaction can seriously hamper their ability to reflect.
Revisit the earlier example about being startled by someone
coming into the room unexpectedly. Imagine that you were so
frightened that you dissociated and lost time as soon as someone
walked in the room, and you became aware again only after the
person left. You might then have no idea what happened and be
afraid that perhaps something bad had occurred. The very fact that
you do not remember frightens you, increasing your fear reaction.
Perhaps you found yourself huddled in a corner and cannot recall
how you got there, or you have a strong urge to run away and hide
that does not make sense to you as an adult. Various parts of
yourself may be activated; you may hear crying in your head, or
yelling about what a coward you are, or a voice that urges you just
to get back to work and not think about it. You may begin to have
flashbacks of past traumatic experiences. Perhaps you experience
contradictory feelings, impulses, thoughts, and so much inner chaos
in your head that you find it hard to think at all, much less reflect
on what is happening and how best to respond. These are some of
the added burdens of dissociation when learning how to reflect.
The materials in this manual begin to help you overcome your
dissociation through regular reflection. In this chapter you will

begin to learn how to reflect on your own inner experiences,
including the ways in which you interact (or avoid interacting) with
dissociative parts of yourself. You will also learn more about how
to reflect about other people so that you are able to “read” their
intentions more accurately. In fact, you will be using reflective
skills in every chapter of this book, and in therapy, so you will have
a lot of practice! At first, you will learn to reflect in retrospect, that
is, you may only be able to reflect on a situation after the fact.
Gradually it will become a more natural skill that you employ in the
moment.
Just like everyone else, you will be able to reflect most easily
when you feel relatively safe, relaxed, calm, and free from
distractions. You also need to learn to become more curious about
yourself, for example, why you always respond to criticism by
freezing, and explore the possibility of physically responding
differently. You can never know everything about yourself; no one
can. The first step is just accepting your experience as it is, without
judgment or urgent need to change or avoid it. You do not need to
know everything about yourself all at once, and in fact, uncertainty
is a very normal part of everyone’s experience.
Retrospective Reflection
As noted earlier, you first learn reflection by looking back at an
experience. In the following section, you will find some examples
of retrospective reflection that will help you understand more about
how to use it for yourself, including all parts of you, and for other
people.
Example 1: Using Reflection With a Chronic Reaction to an
Emotion
We all develop automatic (conditioned) reactions based on past experience.
For example you, or parts of yourself, may have learned to automatically
isolate from others when you feel sad, because you believe you will be
ridiculed or hurt when you are vulnerable (this likely involves core beliefs;
see chapter 21). You may or may not realize that you are sad; you just
withdraw. And perhaps you may not even be especially aware of becoming
more isolated. You just stop spending time with others. Perhaps you do not
even notice that you feel sad, but you hear a persistent crying or keening in
your head that greatly disturbs you, or just have an uneasy sense that

something is not right.
Reflection helps you notice that you feel sad, to recognize the physical
sensations of sadness, and notice the thoughts that accompany the feeling.
You may or may not know why you (or parts of you) are sad, but you can
accept that it is what you are feeling in the present. If you hear a sad or crying
voice, you do not avoid it, but try to understand and help that part of you, or
perhaps ask other parts to help. The sad part of you may then feel comforted
and understood, the voice quiets, and you feel calmer. You notice that you are
isolating yourself, and that this may not be the best solution. You learn early
signs of your tendency to withdraw so you can do something different. You
call a friend to have dinner, even though it takes energy. You remind yourself
that connection with others helps sadness. You can work with isolated parts
of yourself to help them learn to feel safer with people. You are now learning
to be more in charge of your experiences by understanding all parts of
yourself better and by taking all their needs and points of view into
consideration. You are learning to reflect on your own inner experience, make
sense of it, and use it to help you feel better.
Example 2: Using Reflection with a Dissociative Part of Yourself
You often hear the voice of an inner part of yourself that makes negative
comments about what you are doing, or says that you are stupid. You react by
being afraid of that part, and even of hearing the voice, and ashamed because
you believe what it says is true (at least on some level). Sometimes your
reaction to the voice is so painful that you engage in some destructive
behavior to make it stop, such as using alcohol or drugs, physically hurting
yourself, or overeating. This cycle may go on and on. You may label yourself
as crazy because you hear this voice and you feel very ashamed (see chapter
24).
Reflective skills can help you observe the process of what happens when
you hear this voice, and to change your reaction to it, and eventually to
change the entire interchange between you and that critical part of you. You
can begin to notice what you feel as you hear that voice: perhaps crazy, or
afraid, or ashamed, or frustrated. You notice when you hear that voice, you
stop talking in therapy and perhaps have a panic attack. Every time you hear
that inner criticism, you notice that you cringe, your body gets tight, your
head hangs down, and you do not want to move. When you can notice your
tendency to react without doing so immediately, you can then begin to
respond differently. You can be curious about why that voice is there (you
may have always assumed it is there just to speak the “truth” about yourself,
but there are likely other reasons). You could begin to dialogue with the part
whose voice you are hearing. You could ask that part of you to help, and
begin to work to develop inner empathy and cooperation, as you will be
learning through this manual. You can empathize with yourself about how
painful it is to always feel criticized, scared, less than others, hopeless. You

can empathize with how hard that part of you works, yet never seems to get
satisfactory results. You could take some deep breaths, hold your head up,
and put your shoulders back. You have options to respond to the voice that
you did not have before.
In the same way that we use our ability to reflect to better understand
ourselves, we also use reflection to understand the minds of other people, that
is, to make sense of their motivations and intentions.
Example 3: Using Reflection to Understand Other People
You call a friend to invite her out to dinner. She does not return your call.
You assume she has not responded because she does not want to be your
friend anymore or that you are not important to her. You decide you do not
want to have anything to do with her.
These prereflective beliefs about why your friend did not call back are
typically based on your past experiences and on your ongoing fears of being
rejected, long before you could even think of the many possibilities of why
she might not have returned your call. They are a kind of implicit and
inaccurate reflection, a reaction based on a reaction, your own reactions (from
the past) rather than on really understanding your friend. And you may have
contradictory thoughts and feelings about your friend coming from parts
inside—some wanting to continue the relationship, some feeling she is not
worth having as a friend, some believing she is dangerous—confusing you
even more. However, it turns out that your friend’s phone was out of order,
and she did not receive the message.
You have a tendency to react the same way each time you feel rejected:
You withdraw, feel hurt, and assume that people do not like or want to be
around you. But reflective skills allow you to explore many possibilities of
your friend’s intentions toward you. We will start with the one that you
probably assumed, and then move to other possibilities that allow for
reconnection and relational repair.
• Your friend does not like you or care enough about you and
she intentionally chose not to call you back (intentionally
hurtful; the reason you assumed).
• She was sick, or out of town (unable to respond to you, and
not intentional).
• She did not expect a call from you and did not check her
messages (not intentional).
• She intended to call you back, but forgot to respond because
there was a crisis at work or in her family (unintentional, and
not because you are unimportant or she does not care, but
still hurtful).
• She forgot to call you back because she tends to be scattered,

forgetful, and not very reliable (in this case, her own issues
have created a problem, but still it was not intentional,
although hurtful).
• She did call you back, but when you did not answer the
phone, she did not leave a message (not intentional, but
irritating!).
Reflective skills can also help you sort out your own experience and those
of other parts of yourself. You might say something like, “Of course, I am
disappointed that she didn’t respond to me. It is only natural that I would first
assume that she didn’t like me or was mad at me. But I can understand that
perhaps there might be other reasons she did not call back which have
nothing to do with me. I feel sad that it is so hard for me to trust others, and
that I always tend to assume people don’t like me. It feels very lonely and
shameful to feel I am not likable. Perhaps next time, if someone doesn’t
respond to my first call, I will take the risk to call again.” You might have an
inner dialogue with parts of yourself that may have had different
interpretations of and feelings about the situation, empathizing with each one,
but also reminding all parts of you that there are many possible motives and
intentions behind the behavior of others. It is always helpful to get more
information before jumping to conclusions.
Tips for Developing Reflective Skills
To be reflective, you will be learning how to gradually have more
awareness of the present moment, of all parts of yourself, and of
other people.
Be in the Present
It is impossible to reflect on your inner experience if you avoid or
are not aware of it. Likewise, it is hard to reflect on your current
situation if you do not feel present. Reflection begins with being as
present in the moment as much as you are able, which takes
consistent and concentrated practice. Use your anchors for the
present (practice the exercises on anchors in chapters 1 and 2).
Notice Your Inner Experience Without Judgment
Take time to turn your attention inwardly to your thoughts,
feelings, sensations, and other parts of yourself. If you do not
understand what you notice, do not judge yourself; just do the best
you can and move on. If you do not notice anything, do not judge
yourself; simply note that you do not notice anything and move on.

It helps for you to be curious about yourself, about what is going on
inside, and why you think or feel or behave in particular ways.
Even though you may try to understand your mind and that of
others, some of your perceptions, assumptions, or beliefs may be
inaccurate (you will learn more about inaccurate thoughts and
beliefs in chapters 21, 22, and 23). Your reflection may be limited
by past experiences that are no longer relevant to the current
situation (for example, having a prereflective belief that your
therapist is going to yell at you in anger, because your parents did
so, even though your therapist has never yelled) or by inaccurate
beliefs and predictions (for example, believing you are crazy and
will “be put away” because you hear inner voices). In fact, each
part of you likely has a particular set of reactions to other people,
many of them inaccurate. Notice these beliefs and thoughts, as well
as the feelings and behavioral tendencies that accompany them.
Write them down so you can reflect on them more easily.
Notice Similarities and Differences
It helps for you, and all parts of you, to notice similarities and
differences—in your inner experience, in others, in situations. That
is, you can begin to separate the past from the present, your inner
fears or beliefs from external realities. You can notice that you
react similarly each time you feel lonely, rejected, sad, or angry.
You can notice that you have patterns of reactions that go back to
your past history, that have become automatic. You can begin to
notice what is different about the current circumstances that might
call for a different response from you (for example, your friend will
never hit you, so you need not expect it).
Be Empathic
You must be empathic with yourself, including all parts of yourself,
each toward the others, and also empathic with other people’s
foibles and struggles. You can develop the capacity to “walk in the
shoes” of another and of different parts of yourself (for instance,
noticing yourself with empathy when you feel angry, incompetent,
or ashamed). Over time, you will be able to recognize all parts of
yourself as you. And you will learn much more about successfully
developing and maintaining secure and safe relationships with
others.

Homework Sheet 6.1
Learning to Reflect
Reflect in retrospect on a minor situation in which reflective skills
might have been helpful. Use the aforementioned examples as a
guide.
• Briefly describe the situation as you perceived it at the time.
• What were your thoughts, feelings, sensations, predictions?
• What did you do in this situation?
• If you are aware that any other parts of yourself were involved in
the situation, whether directly, or by having an inner, private
reaction, please describe those reactions.
• Describe ways, if any, in which dissociative parts of yourself
affected your behaviors and decisions in that situation.
• Was your reaction (for example, your feelings, thoughts,
sensations, or behavior), or that of other parts of yourself, a familiar
pattern? If so, please describe the pattern.
• Notice in retrospect ways in which you or other parts of yourself
might have reacted not only to the situation but to your own
feelings, thoughts, or behaviors. For example, feeling ashamed of
feeling jealous, and criticizing yourself for being jealous.

Homework Sheet 6.2
Reflecting on Your Inner Experience in the Present
1. Notice your current inner experience, including any thoughts,
feelings, sensations, or other parts of yourself. Try to acknowledge
and accept those experiences with interest and without judgment.
Notice any possible negative reactions that may occur during this
exercise, for example, thinking that this is a stupid exercise or
being convinced that you cannot succeed in learning the skills in
this manual. You may write down what you notice.
2. Reflecting about another person’s intentions and motivations.
Choose a person with whom you are acquainted but not very close,
and whose behavior has bothered you at some point in time.
Describe the behavior and in what ways it bothered you or other
parts of yourself.
a. Describe what you thought and felt about yourself and the
other person.
b. Describe what you imagine the other person thought and felt.
c. Imagine and list possibilities, even if you do not agree with
them, about why that person might have acted in that
particular way.
d. Can you feel empathy for that person and for yourself? If so,
please describe your experience of feeling empathy (for
example, your thought and feelings). If not, describe what
you did think and feel (without judgment).

CHAPTER SEVEN
Beginning Work With Dissociative
Parts
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Topic: Beginning Work With Dissociative Parts
Introduction
Initial Dilemmas in Working With Dissociative Parts
of the Self
First Steps in Working With Dissociative Parts of the
Self
Forms of Inner Awareness and Communication
Techniques for Inner Communication
• Break
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 7.1, Stages of Awareness
and Acceptance of Dissociation.
Complete Homework Sheet 7.2., Recognizing
Dissociative Parts of Yourself.
Complete Homework Sheet 7.3, Practicing Inner
Communication.
Consult with your therapist as needed for help with
working with parts of yourself.
Continue to practice the Learning to Be Present
exercise and practice your reflecting skills.
Introduction

Connecting with yourself and reflecting on your experiences are
essential tasks in which you must engage every day in order to
function at your best. The more you know and understand about
yourself—all of you—the better decisions you can make to
improve your life. Every day you need to make many choices and
compromises. All people sometimes have conflicting thoughts,
wishes, needs, and feelings. This is no different for individuals with
dissociative disorders, except that their inner experience happens to
be organized as relatively compartmentalized or divided parts of
the personality that have their own “minds,” so it is harder for you
to be aware of inner conflicts or to resolve them. You must learn to
take into account the various needs and feelings of dissociative
parts that seem as though they do not belong to yourself. In this
chapter you will learn some basic approaches to understanding
more about parts of yourself and how to work with them.
Initial Dilemmas in Working With Dissociative Parts
of the Self
Cooperating with various parts of yourself is sometimes more
easily said than done because there is so much avoidance and
conflict that keeps dissociative parts separated. We previously
mentioned that many people initially find it difficult to accept their
diagnosis, in part because they have a strong avoidance, that is, a
phobia for dissociative parts of the personality (Van der Hart et al.,
2006). Others find it a great relief to finally be understood. People
with dissociative disorders often make comments such as: “That
(part) isn’t me!” or “That voice doesn’t belong to me!” or “I don’t
want anything to do with those voices or those other parts!” These
attitudes are quite understandable and are the result of confusion
about, or fear or shame of the experiences contained by other parts.
People also fear losing control to other parts because some parts
may have such different or unacceptable emotions and behaviors.
For instance, some parts want to come to therapy, while others
would rather avoid it or believe that there is no need for it. Some
parts want to focus on work, while others find work boring and
would rather have fun or stay in bed. Some parts want to have a
close relationship, while others are terrified of being close. Some
parts are focused on daily life, while others are stuck in the past.
The more you tend to avoid these conflicts and dissociative parts of

yourself, the more difficulties you are likely to have in daily life.
The less collaboration among parts, the more inner conflict you
have.
First Steps in Working With Dissociative Parts of the
Self
When you have a dissociative disorder, there are several stages of
realization about how your personality and self are organized and
function. In your homework in this chapter you will find a
description of these stages, which range from complete
unawareness or avoidance to complete acceptance. First, you must
learn to acknowledge dissociative parts, and accept the sense of
being and feeling fragmented. It is typical for you to need support
to overcome your fear or shame of other parts of yourself. Then
you can decide how you might be able to make conscious efforts to
communicate internally with parts.
The first dialogues among parts should be focused on building
internal communication and cooperation solely toward improving
the quality of everyday life. These inner dialogues include the
following:
• Learning to deal with triggers, that is, stimuli that evoke
(aspects) of traumatic memories (see chapters 15 and 16)
• Increasing internal and external safety
• Working together in therapy
• Cooperating to complete daily life tasks
Traumatic memories, emotions, or sensations generally should not
be shared among parts at this point. That work is for later, when
you feel more calm and steady, and parts have more empathy
toward each other, are working together well, and are better able to
cope with emotions.
Finally, it is important to realize that various parts actually have
often been cooperating for years for mutual aid or protection
without your conscious awareness. Sometimes this happens almost
automatically (for instance, one part automatically takes over from
another part in a particular situation, or some parts that are very
troubled are inactive while you are at work). Other times it is a
deliberate, conscious choice.

When parts of yourself are not cooperating with each other,
when they do not function in a coordinated and effective way, and
when they each emphasize different priorities, then inner conflict,
chaos, and confusion can ensue. The first step toward resolution is
to help all parts of yourself to focus on what you are doing in the
present, especially in relation to therapy and daily life tasks.
Forms of Inner Awareness and Communication
Cooperation among parts of yourself requires you to learn to accept
and then communicate with all of you. We will now focus on basic
inner communication.
Gradually Acknowledge and Accept Parts of Yourself
When you have not been very reflective in your life, you are not
accustomed to paying attention internally. Becoming aware of parts
of yourself is one of the early tasks toward the end of
acknowledging and accepting yourself as a whole person, with all
your thoughts, emotions, your body, and your behaviors. We have
already discussed some ways in which you can begin to notice parts
of yourself in Homework Sheet 2.3. Acknowledging and accepting
yourself is not always easy, even for people who do not have a
dissociative disorder. It can be complex and sometimes daunting at
first. But each time you are aware of a part of yourself, you can also
begin to be aware of how you think and feel about that part of you.
Those thoughts and feelings are extremely important to your
therapy work.
Once you notice parts of yourself, you can begin to accept them
without judgment. When you are less judgmental, you feel less
afraid or ashamed, less threatened. And when you feel less anxious,
you may become more curious about parts of yourself, how they
function, and how you can work together more effectively.
Listen to and Communicate With Parts of Yourself
Once you are able to acknowledge and accept parts of yourself, you
can then learn to communicate, which involves listening and
sharing. Many people with a dissociative disorder hear inner voices
that represent various dissociative parts. They are able to carry on
internal conversations. Others may experience this a little more
indirectly, by “sensing” or having a kind of strange “knowing”

about what parts are trying to communicate. In learning to
communicate with another part, others find it helpful to imagine
talking to a real person, though, of course, parts of yourself are not
other people. The imaginal exercise is just a way to develop a better
sense of other parts of you. Some people find it effective to write
from the perspective of each part. It is important for you to find
your own way of communicating that is comfortable for you.
Listening to and talking with the voices in your head instead of
trying to make them go away will ultimately be the fastest and most
effective way of healing.
But initially you may find inner communication difficult. Do
not hesitate to ask your therapist to help you during these initial
attempts. Everyone finds it helpful to set aside a specific, quiet,
calm time each day for inner communication. At first, you are
likely quite naturally afraid or ashamed of parts of yourself, and
you may want to avoid communication. And some parts may also
want to avoid you. Sometimes it may seem as though all parts of
you are talking at once. People describe this as a chaotic noise or
incessant murmur in their head which is overwhelming and
confusing, making it hard to think. Generally this experience occurs
when you (or other parts of you) are feeling especially anxious,
threatened, or ashamed.
A common difficulty in the beginning is inner threats when you
try to communicate with parts of yourself. Usually this comes from
a dominant, highly critical part of you. Such parts, as noted in early
chapters, are only trying to protect you by reacting with the limited
and rigid patterns of response that are familiar to them. These parts
need help to learn more effective and empathic ways of protecting
you and dealing with fear, anger, and shame. It is easiest, if
possible, to start inner dialogue with a part of yourself with which
you feel most comfortable.
One way to start communication is to find common ground
upon which all parts can agree. For example, it is highly likely that
all parts of you want to feel better, no matter how they seem to feel
or act. Usually every part can agree with this goal, even though
they are not likely to agree on how to achieve it in the beginning.
But it is a place to start.
When daily life is going more smoothly, we all tend to feel
better. One of your first objectives is to focus on learning to help all
parts of you become more cooperative and communicative about

daily life. You might have inner discussions, for example, about
how to work together to get to appointments on time or to complete
chores more efficiently, or how to best use your leisure time. You
may not be able to communicate with every part of yourself
immediately. This is normal and expected. It may take some time
for all parts of you to feel comfortable and safe enough to allow
more communication.
Techniques for Inner Communication
Following are some alternatives to “inner dialogue” that might be
helpful to try.
Written Forms of Communication
Try writing to parts of yourself, introducing your therapy as an
avenue of healing, and sharing your good intentions. Emphasize
that even though you are scared or ashamed, you still want to make
the effort to get to know all parts of yourself in a paced way. You
are willing to try. Also emphasize that traumatic memories should
be contained for the time being, until parts begin to feel more safe
and comfortable with each other and are able to work together more
effectively in daily life. Many people like to write on the computer.
It is faster and the file may be deleted quickly if you are worried
that someone might read what you have written. What is most
important is that you begin to learn to tolerate knowing a little more
about parts of yourself in the present.
Talk Inwardly
Another way of communicating or making contact is “talking
inwardly,” in other words, having a one-sided conversation with
parts of the personality, even if you are not yet ready for them to
communicate back to you. You can use this technique if you seem
agitated, anxious, confused, or afraid inside. You do not always
need to know immediately the reason for your inner turmoil or
which part(s) is having trouble to be able to help. Just quietly talk
inwardly to all parts of yourself, calming and reassuring these parts
of you that you are safe, that you are willing to learn to care for
yourself more effectively, that you are getting help. Remind all
parts of the present by looking around and noticing your
surroundings. Use your anchors in the safe present from the first

two chapters. The goal is to connect to parts of yourself and let
them know you are willing to pay attention and help.
Inner Meetings
Some people may be ready to conduct “inner meetings,” in which
parts come together internally to discuss issues. Some may find this
too overwhelming or not fitting. We describe the details of this
technique in chapter 27, if you feel ready to practice it at this point
in time. It is essential to take your time and go at your own pace.

Homework Sheet 7.1
Stages of Awareness and Acceptance of Dissociation
Below you will find a list of steps toward acknowledging,
accepting, communicating, and cooperating with parts of yourself.
You should work at your own pace and not expect to be able to
accomplish all these steps at once. Circle all statements that apply
to you now. Later in the course of therapy, you can revisit these
steps to check your progress.
• I do not want to accept that I have dissociative parts.
• I am aware that some parts exist with which I am not in
communication.
• I am aware, but avoidant of (some of) my parts.
• I accept the existence of (some of) my parts.
• I am beginning to communicate with (some of) my parts.
• I can negotiate and collaborate about some issues in daily life
with (some of) my parts.
• I take into account the needs of (some) parts of myself.
• I understand and accept the functions of (some of) my parts.
• I feel empathy for (some of) my parts.
• I am able to help (some of) my parts feel more safe and
comfortable.
• I have regular communication with (some of) my parts to
discuss issues of daily life.

Homework Sheet 7.2
Recognizing Dissociative Parts of Yourself
There are various ways in which you can notice the presence of
another part of yourself. Read the following examples and see if
they fit your experience. Below the examples, describe one
experience of becoming aware of a part of yourself.
• You have lost time and discover that you have done
something of which you have no memory, yet you know you
must have done it.
• You hear yourself talking, but it seems as though the words
you hear are not your “own.”
• You experience yourself outside your body, as though you
are looking at someone else from a distance and you cannot
control your actions.
• You have thoughts, emotions, sensations, memories that you
experience as not belonging to you.
• You hear voices in your head that talk to you or to each
other.
• You find yourself in a place and have no idea how you got
there.
• You feel your body, your movements, or actions are not
within your control.

Homework Sheet 7.3
Practicing Inner Communication
Record your attempts at inner communication each day this week.
Answer these questions for each day of the week.
1. Describe what you said or did to establish empathic
communication with a part of yourself.
2. Describe the response of that part of yourself.
3. What, if anything, made it difficult to communicate?
4. What if, anything, helped you communicate?
Sunday
1.
2.
3.
4.
Monday
1.
2.
3.
4.

Tuesday
1.
2.
3.
4.
Wednesday
1.
2.
3.
4.
Thursday
1.
2.
3.
4.
Friday
1.
2.
3.

4.
Saturday
1.
2.
3.
4.

CHAPTER EIGHT
Developing an Inner Sense of Safety
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Topic: Developing an Inner Sense of Safety
Introduction
Developing an Inner Sense of Safety
• Break
• Exercise: Experiencing an Inner Sense of Safety
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Practice the exercise Experiencing an Inner Sense of
Safety each day.
Complete Homework Sheet 8.1, Developing an Inner
Sense of Safety and Safe Places.
Introduction
Being safe in the external environment is a major initial goal in
therapy for traumatized people who are still threatened in their
present-day life. In chapters 28–31 we will address the subject of
choosing safe people in your life and of setting limits when you do
not feel at ease with someone. If you are not safe in your current
external environment, it is imperative to discuss this serious
problem with your therapist, so you can get help. However, even
though many traumatized people are (relatively) safe in their
environment, they still do not feel safe. Thus, a major goal in
therapy is to establish a sense of inner safety, of being safe with
yourself, all parts of yourself, with your inner experiences. An

inner sense of safety, also referred to as a safe state (O’Shea, 2009),
is the awareness of feeling relaxed and calm in the present moment,
when there is no actual threat or danger.
Developing an Inner Sense of Safety
Inner safety is strongly related to being able to be present in the
here and now, and in feeling secure in at least one or two trusting
relationships with other people. When young children grow up in
the context of safe and trusting relationships, where they are
provided a safe environment, they naturally develop an inner sense
of safety. Many people with a history of early traumatization have
not had many opportunities to experience a safe environment or
safe relationships, and therefore they have been unable to develop a
sense of inner safety and security. Thus, it may be hard for them to
even imagine what it feels like to be safe. They may know
cognitively that their current environment is safe, and yet they do
not feel safe or comfortable at all, as though something terrible is
going to happen any minute. And even when their present situation
is safe, some parts of them remain stuck in trauma-time, unable to
experience the safe present. In addition, traumatized individuals
often do not feel safe with their own inner experiences, that is, with
some of their own emotions, thoughts, sensations, and other actions
of dissociative parts. Subsequent avoidance of inner experience
makes it hard to stay present, and it sets in motion an inner cycle of
fear, criticism, and shame, adding yet more to a lack of inner safety.
Even if you cannot imagine feeling totally safe, probably there
have been times when you have felt less unsafe than others, and
you can begin learning about safety from that point. If the concept
of “safety” seems too foreign to you, you may think instead of a
pleasant and calm place, a place where you feel understood and
accepted, or perhaps a place where you are alone and know you
will not be disturbed.
Next we describe ways to create a sense of inner safety,
including imagery of safe places in which you and other parts of
you can find safe and calm refuge from the stresses of daily life and
from your painful past, until you are able to heal more fully.
Being in the Present
First, we will focus on developing an inner sense of safety in the

present. It is essential to help all parts of yourself feel calm and
relaxed once you are able to determine that the present moment is
actually safe externally. You can train yourself to consciously let
go of inner tension, to allow all parts of you to notice this moment
of safety and well-being, of relaxation and inner quiet, even though
at first these moments may be few and far between. Some parts of
you may find it easier to experience an inner sense of safety than
others. For some parts of you, finding that state is easier with
someone whom you trust; for others it may be when you are alone,
when you are with a beloved pet, listening to your favorite music,
or outdoors in a special, quiet place in nature.
Most certainly, an inner sense of safety can only be experienced
when your environment is actually safe. And even if there are
situations that feel threatening in the present, there are still
moments when you are actually safe. It is in these moments that
you can begin to focus on developing an inner sense of safety.
A sense of safety can occur when all parts of you can agree to at
least temporarily let go of inner conflicts and criticism and to focus
on the present moment. This may be difficult to achieve and may
not last long in the beginning, but you will find that all parts of you
appreciate this state, and the more you practice, the easier it will
become.
Developing Imaginary Inner Safe Places
Inner safe spaces are images of places where you can be safe,
relaxed, and cared for. These images have been shown to be helpful
to many people, not just those with dissociative disorders. This type
of imaginal activity is well known to produce a feeling of
relaxation and well-being in those who use it regularly. If your
inner experience feels so jarring, unsafe, and frightening, as it often
does in individuals with dissociative disorders, the ability to
imagine these spaces becomes especially important and helpful.
When you have a dissociative disorder, some parts of you
remain stuck in trauma-time and thus do not experience a sense of
safety. They may be on high alert for potential danger and thus
unable to relax enough to feel safe. And individuals with a
dissociative disorder typically experience a vicious cycle of rage,
shame, fear, and hopelessness inside that contributes to a lack of
inner safety. Some parts are angry and critical, while others are
hurting, afraid, or ashamed. There are often strong conflicts among

these different parts. The more parts express their pain, the angrier
and more hurtful other parts become, because they cannot tolerate
what they consider to be “weakness.” The more angry and critical
parts are toward other parts, the more these parts suffer. This
creates an endless loop of inner misery and lack of safety.
When you are able to create one or more imaginary safe places
for parts of you that are in pain or afraid, this opens the door to the
possibility of alleviating this negative loop. Angry parts feel some
relief once they learn that terrified or hurting parts are quieter when
they feel safer. Thus, you are able to reduce conflict by helping
both types of parts simultaneously. Once you are able to develop an
inner imaginary safe space, all parts of you can experience it and
have it available anytime you need or want. For example, when
some parts of the personality are overwhelmed, and you need to
accomplish an important task, these parts may go to the safe place
to rest while you complete your task. Such parts may feel calmer in
an imaginary safe place until such time that they can focus on their
healing during therapy. Or they can remain undisturbed in some
situations that might trigger painful past experiences, such as going
to a doctor or being in a meeting at work in which there is conflict.
Some people find that one imaginary place is sufficient for all
parts of themselves, while others feel the need for different places
that match the differing needs of parts. And of course, inner safe
places should always be paired with efforts to ensure your safety
with other people and in the world. You cannot have an inner sense
of safety without actually being safe!
Examples of Imaginary Inner Safe Places
• Pleasant outdoor places such as lakes, meadows, streams,
pools, islands, forests, mountains, oceans
• Structures: Tree houses, huts, porches, mountain and beach
cottages, safe homes
• Rooms especially adapted to the needs of each part
• Safe cave or cavern
• Spacecraft
• Your own special planet
• Submarine or underwater home
• Hot air balloon
• Although technically not spaces, some people like the image

of protective covering: space suit, suit of armor, invisible
force field, invisible cloak (for more of this type of imagery,
see “The Store” exercise in chapter 14).
You may want a safe (or quiet) place for all parts of yourself
together, or some parts may want their own place. Pay close
attention to what various parts of you want or need. Remember that
imagination is limitless and can be continually adapted as your
needs change.
If you cannot imagine a place, do not hesitate to ask your
therapist to help you. Sometimes it helps to draw one or to find a
picture of a place that you like. And as we noted earlier, start with a
feeling of being less unsafe than at other times. You can make a list
of all the comfort measures you would like to have in your safe
place. Also remember that a prime rule is not to criticize or judge
parts for what they imagine, and for what they want or need, even if
you do not agree. Perhaps not all parts of you can yet participate;
that is fine. Just start where you are able.
A safe place should be a private place that only you know
about, and that no one else can find or intrude upon without your
permission. If you feel especially unsafe, you can imagine that your
place is surrounded by a fence, a wall, a special invisible field, or
an alarm system. You are in charge of whether you allow other
people there. You can also negotiate with all parts to respect each
other’s places and not intrude or “visit” without permission.
Your safe place can protect you or particular parts of yourself
from any overwhelming stimuli in the present, and it should be
comfortable and pleasant. It is a place in which you feel your needs
for safety, comfort, rest, and so forth are fulfilled. Feel free to add
anything you want in this place to improve your sense of comfort,
well-being, and safety. You can imagine comfortable beds; your
favorite foods, games, and movies; and animals that you like. Your
place can be populated with animals or other people, or no one but
yourself. You can have people nearby, but not too close. This place
is yours to construct, and yours alone.
Any part of you may go to a safe place at any time. Some parts
may voluntarily go to a safe place when there has been some inner
collaboration and agreement that this might provide temporary
relief or containment. However, never try to shut away or hide parts
to get rid of them! Prisons are not safe places, and trying to avoid

parts in this manner will only heighten your inner sense of being
unsafe. It is important for all parts of you to see the value of a sense
of safety and the use of safe places, and to do their best to
cooperate together to create this healing image.
A literal safe place at home is also important for many people.
You can create a special room or corner of a room that represents
your safe place. You may add items to this place that represent
safety and calm to you. Choose colors and textures that are pleasant
or quieting, objects that have a positive meaning to you,
photographs of people who care about you, or of places that you
find pleasant.
EXERCISE: EXPERIENCING AN INNER SENSE OF
SAFETY
Using the section above and Homework Sheet 8.1 as guides, you can practice
developing an inner sense of safety and a safe space now. In group, you can
help each other as desired, and you may use your group trainers as resources
as well.

Homework Sheet 8.1
Developing an Inner Sense of Safety and Safe Places
1. Practice feeling an inner sense of safety or calm.
a. First, describe a situation in which you can experience a
moment of inner safety and/or calmness. Would it be at home
alone, with another person, outside in nature, listening to
music?
b. Next, allow yourself and all parts of you to experience that
inner sense of safety. Describe your experience of it, that is,
your thoughts, emotions, sensations.
c. Notice what, if anything, disrupts your inner sense of safety
and describe it below. Is it a thought, a feeling, a sensation, a
shift away from being present? Is it another part of you that is
not yet able to share in this sense of safety in the current
moment?
d. Imagine that experience of inner safety now and notice again
what it feels like.
e. Try to create moments of inner safety every day. Regular
practice improves your ability to create your inner sense of
safety.
2. Describe, if you feel comfortable, your safe place. If you do not
want to share it, try to describe what you feel like when you are in
that place. Describe what is helpful about your safe place to you, or
other parts of yourself.

3. If other parts of you need their own unique safe place, work on
creating those images. Pay close attention to what those parts want
or need in terms of safety and comfort. If you feel comfortable
doing so, describe those places here.
4. If you have difficulties in developing an inner sense of safety or
safe places, please describe what has interfered below. You are
encouraged to get help from your therapist with these temporary
difficulties.

PART TWO
SKILLS REVIEW
You have learned a number of skills in this section of the manual.
In this section you will find a review of those skills and an
opportunity to develop them further. As you review, we encourage
you to return to the chapters to read them again and repractice the
homework a little at a time. Remember that regular, daily practice
is essential to learn new skills.
For each skill set below, answer the following questions:
1. In what situation(s) did you practice this skill?
2. How did this skill help you?
3. What, if any, difficulties have you had in practicing this
skill?
4. What additional help or resources might you need to feel
more successful in mastering this skill?
Chapter 5, Overcoming a Phobia of an Inner Experience
(Thought, Sensation, Emotion, etc.)
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 6, Reflecting on an Inner Experience
1.
2.

3.
4.
Chapter 7, Inner Communication With Parts of Yourself About
Current Issues in Daily Life (Not Your Past History)
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 7, Developing Empathy Toward a Part of Yourself
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 7, Cooperation Among Parts of Yourself to Accomplish a
Common Task or Goal in Your Daily Life
1.
2.

3.
4.
Chapter 8, Developing a Sense of Inner Safety and Safe Places
1.
2.
3.
4.

PART THREE
Improving Daily Life

CHAPTER NINE
Improving Sleep
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Exercise
• Break
• Topic: Improving Sleep
Introduction
Types of Sleep Problems
Factors That Contribute to Sleep Problems
Improving the Quality of Sleep
Tips for Dealing With Specific Sleep Problems
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 9.1, Sleep Record.
Complete Homework Sheet 9.2, Making Your
Bedroom a Pleasant Place for Sleep.
Complete Homework Sheet 9.3, Developing a Sleep
Kit.
Complete Homework Sheet 9.4, Developing a Bedtime
Routine.
Introduction
People with complex dissociative disorders almost always suffer
from periods of disturbed sleep for a variety of reasons. Some of
these may be physiological; others are related to the activity of
various dissociative parts. They may even have an underlying sleep
disorder. Thus, it is important to discuss your sleep problems with
your primary care doctor. The less you sleep, the more tired you

are. This increases your chance of struggling in daily life because
you have less energy and are more prone to become emotionally
vulnerable and to have difficulties with thinking. In this chapter we
will discuss types of sleep problems and how to improve your
sleep, including how to cope with nighttime flashbacks and
nightmares, and with parts of yourself that may be disruptive
during the night.
Types of Sleep Problems
It is important for you, your therapist, and your doctor to know
what types of sleep problems you experience in the present, and
what you have struggled with in the past. Of course, sleep problems
may vary over time and even have different causes over time.
Following is a list of common sleep problems in people with
dissociative disorders. Check the ones that are currently a problem
for you.
• Difficulty falling asleep
• Difficulty staying asleep
• Frequent waking
• Very early morning waking
• Excessive sleepiness (for instance, falling asleep during the
day)
• Disturbed sleep–wake patterns (for instance, sleeping in the
day and being awake at night)
• Nightmares
• Night terrors
• Sleepwalking
• Teeth grinding
• Bedwetting
• Restless legs
• Panic during the night
• Sleep apnea (short episodes of not breathing during sleep;
often associated with obesity)
• Feeling that you have not slept deeply or well, and
subsequently feeling tired
• Activity of dissociative parts during the night
• Postponing bedtime due to being afraid of going to sleep or
getting in bed

• Flashbacks as you fall asleep or awaken
• Illusions and hallucinations as you fall asleep or awaken
• Severe difficulty waking up or being roused by someone else
• Narcolepsy (sudden, uncontrollable episodes of deep sleep
during waking hours). Narcolepsy should be distinguished
from episodes of collapse, as described previously in the
manual, and must be diagnosed with a sleep study.
Factors That Contribute to Sleep Problems
There are numerous causes of or contributing factors to sleep
problems in those with dissociative disorders. Often more than one
factor is involved, making it important to receive a comprehensive
assessment for serious sleep difficulties.
Traumatization
It is harder to sleep well when you are traumatized. When it gets
dark and quiet, your mind sometimes starts to work overtime. If
you tend to avoid traumatic memories, you are more vulnerable to
having them emerge once you are no longer preoccupied with work
or other activities. Because some traumatizing events may have
occurred at night, in the dark, or in bed, many people are afraid of
the dark or dread going to bed. These fears may be prominent in
parts that live in trauma-time. You, or certain parts of you, may
also feel more alone, vulnerable, or unprotected in the dark or when
you are sleeping. You, or parts of you, can become more jumpy,
fearful, and hyperalert; therefore, you may sleep more lightly and
awaken often during the night.
People with a dissociative disorder often suffer from trauma-
related nightmares, night terrors, flashbacks, or nighttime panic
attacks. Thus, they tend to avoid going to bed or only sleep once it
is light outside. Sleepwalking, crying, moaning, shouting, or
fighting while asleep are not uncommon. A few may have
bedwetting on occasion. Although this may be embarrassing, it is
important to understand that some dissociative parts of the self may
experience themselves as very young and terrified. Such parts may
be too afraid to get out of bed to go to the bathroom, or they may be
so terrified that you urinate involuntarily. If this happens, do not be
hard on yourself. Just change your bed linens and continue to work
on grounding, inner empathy, and reassurance about present-day

safety for those parts of yourself. The more you can reassure and
comfort all parts of yourself, the fewer problems you will have at
night.
Struggle for Time Among Dissociative Parts
People with a complex dissociative disorder, especially DID, may
have an internal struggle for control among parts of themselves.
Parts may want or demand specific time for themselves, feeling that
they do not have enough time for their own activities. This may
become a major problem, interrupting not only daytime activities
but also sleep. Sometimes dissociative parts may be more active at
night, when the main part of the personality is more fatigued and
less “on guard.” Some dissociative parts may only be active during
the night. The following morning you may feel exhausted and not
understand why. You may find evidence of activities that you have
done, such as using the computer, eating, cleaning, or drawing.
Sometimes parts stay busy because they dread going to sleep or are
afraid to close their eyes. They may fear losing control or having
nightmares.
Other Emotional Problems
Sleep disturbances are common in those who experience moderate
to severe anxiety or depression. Many traumatized individuals
experience both. This additional biological contribution to sleep
problems can best be addressed with a combination of medication,
therapy, and healthy lifestyle changes.
Excessive Stimulation
Drinking too much caffeine or alcohol, or using drugs or tobacco
can have an adverse effect on your sleep. Heavy exercise or eating,
reading stimulating books, or watching exciting or disturbing
movies before bed can also affect your sleep. Some people may not
be aware that other parts are engaging in these behaviors. If you
lose time in the present and suspect this possibility, please discuss it
with your therapist.
Lack of Stimulation
On the other hand, sleeping or resting too much during the day,
being too sedentary, and inadequate exercise can also lead to poor
sleep.

Improving the Quality of Sleep
With a few adjustments in lifestyle and some inner empathy,
communication, and cooperation, you can improve your sleep.
Making Your Bedroom a Pleasant Place for Sleep
Make your bedroom, or the place where you sleep, a safe and
comfortable place for all parts of yourself. Set an agreeable
temperature in your bedroom: A bit cooler is usually preferable.
Make sure you have sufficient light to be able to get your bearings
if you wake up during the night, for instance, a night light or dim
lamp. It is helpful for your bedroom to be relatively uncluttered and
for your bed linens to be fresh. If you wish, spray a nice fragrance
in your room before sleep. Use the anchors you developed in the
exercise from chapters 1 and 2 and have them in full view in your
bedroom, to remind you of being in the present. Ensure that all
parts of yourself have anchors that are helpful to them. Also create
a “sleep kit” for yourself (see Homework Sheet 9.3). Remove items
from your bedroom that may be triggering. These could be objects
or colors that remind you of the past, but they could also be certain
sounds or smells. Some people find it helpful to take out everything
from their room that would be a distraction from sleep, including
televisions, radios, and video games. Others find it helpful to have
background noise, such as soft music or the TV, in order to sleep.
However, if you need noise, a steady, droning “white” noise is
preferable for sleeping, such as a fan.
If you, or parts of you, feel afraid during the night, make sure
your home is as secure as possible, for instance, lock the doors and
install a security system if you feel the need. Some people feel safer
with a pet in the house. Have your local emergency phone number
preprogrammed into your phone, and keep your phone by your bed.
These are common-sense precautions, but they may also provide an
extra feeling of security for parts of you.
Preparing All Parts of Yourself for Sleep
Take the time to communicate with all parts of yourself so that you
have maximum awareness of your concerns and needs about
sleeping. It is essential that internal agreement is made about a
regular time for you (all parts of you) to sleep each night. Some
parts may be active during the night because they perceive it as

“their time,” when you are not burdened by the responsibilities of
daily life. This activity is a sign that you are not giving yourself
sufficient personal time during the day. If you can communicate
and negotiate with these parts and allow for some regular personal
time during the day, you may see a drastic decrease in activity
during the night.
Some parts may have preferences about sleeping that other parts
do not share. Please be respectful of all parts of yourself, and pay
attention to everything that comes to your mind about improving
your sleep. For example, you may have a strong desire to keep a
stuffed animal on the bed, but as an adult, this makes you
uncomfortable. If there are parts of you who experience themselves
as younger, you may need to address their needs compassionately
and find compromises that are acceptable for all parts. Remember
that parts can be stuck in the past and experience themselves as
young, and your job as an adult is to help those parts of you feel
secure and safe in the present.
Establishing Sleep Routines
Everyone finds it helpful to have a regular time to go bed and to get
up. Set a time that is reasonable for going to sleep and aim to go to
bed around that time every night. It can be helpful to engage in
restful and relaxing activities before bed, activities that are not too
stimulating. For example, read a nice book, watch a funny TV
program, listen to your favorite music, take a relaxing bath or
shower, or a have a caffeine-free drink and small healthy snack.
Make a regular routine of activities that slowly wind you down
toward sleep.
Some people like to imagine younger parts of themselves
gathering around for a story, or imagine tucking them in to bed.
One person liked to hug a pillow as though she were hugging a
child, as she talked to her young self inside: “Don’t forget that I am
taking care of you and that you are safe.” Make sure that you, in
your own way, communicate with all parts of yourself to remind
yourself that you are safe and it is OK to go to sleep.
Most people prefer to wear something when they are sleeping—
pajamas might provide a feeling of safety and protection. Avoid
sleeping in your daytime clothing, because it may not be
comfortable, and changing into pajamas is a nice ritual that reminds
you it is now bedtime.

If you have a TV in your bedroom and you need the sound to
help you sleep, make sure you do not watch programs that might be
upsetting to you or to parts of yourself. The point is to determine
what helps you get to sleep and stay asleep on a regular basis. Some
people prefer music, as long as it is relaxing and soothing. Others
enjoy recorded nature sounds, such as the ocean or the wind in the
trees. If you like to read and it helps you go to sleep, do so quietly
in bed for a while, but make sure what you are reading is pleasant
and not overly stimulating. If you read to avoid going to sleep, then
try not to take a book to bed with you. Try a short relaxation or
meditation exercise before going to sleep. One nice meditation is to
reflect on three or four things for which you are especially grateful
in your life.
Tips for Dealing With Specific Sleep Problems
If You Cannot Slow Down Your Thoughts
• Check with all parts inside. Ask whether some part of you
needs to communicate inside. If so, ask that part whether it
can wait until the next day. It is important to be able to
temporarily delay worry and thoughts that interfere with
much needed sleep. Find out whether parts of you need
something to be different in order to get to sleep. Be attentive
to and respectful of all parts of yourself.
• Distract yourself.
Count sheep (or your favorite animal), or count backward
slowly from 100 and stay focused on that mental activity,
as silly as it may sound. It keeps your mind from straying
into problem areas that would keep you awake. Each time
you lose track of the count, bring yourself back and start
at the beginning.
Imagine a big STOP sign each time you start thinking
about something. After you see the stop sign, refocus your
attention on breathing slowly in and out. Breathe in to the
count of three, hold for a count of three, and breathe out
to a count of three. Repeat several times, just focusing on
your breathing.
When you cannot get your mind off your problems when

you lie down, imagine your thoughts flowing past you in
a stream, and one by one, they flow past you, and down
the stream. You know they are there, but you have no
need to do anything other than observe them flow through
your mind.
Some people find it helpful to get up and write down what
is bothering them, with an internal promise that they will
deal with it the next day.
Imagine putting your problems in a safe container
(computer file, bank vault, box, etc.) for the night. You
can return to them at the right time the following day.
Imagine one of the following:
A warm, white light that envelops you such that you
feel utterly relaxed and safe
A beautiful balloon that you inflate. As you blow air
into the balloon, imagine blowing all your tension and
problems into the balloon. When you feel more relaxed,
tie the balloon and allow it to float up into the sky. If
you wish, you may keep it on a string.
Leaning back against a very safe and caring person
Use one of the additional relaxing imagery exercises in
chapter 11.
If You Cannot Sleep After a Reasonable Amount of Time
• Turn the clock away so you cannot keep checking the time.
You will only become obsessed with the time if you cannot
get to sleep, which will make the problem worse.
• Remind yourself that there will be times when you cannot
sleep. You have always been able to function the next day. If
you cannot sleep tonight, then you may take something to
help you sleep the following night. Your body will eventually
sleep.
• Stop trying to make yourself go to sleep. Get up and go to
another room (or another part of the bedroom), do something
quiet to distract yourself (for instance, read a book or watch a
TV program that is not too exciting, listen to peaceful music,
do some stretching exercises), and go back to bed when you
feel sleepy. Do this as often as necessary during the night.

If You Wake Up After a Nightmare
• If you wake up at night after a disturbing dream or nightmare,
or feel anxious and panicky, it is important to be able to calm
down and comfort yourself and other parts that are anxious.
Work with yourself and your therapist to develop various
ways to help yourself.
• The first step is always to get your bearings in the present.
Use all the anchors to the present you have put in your
bedroom. Talk to yourself quietly and tell yourself out loud
where you are.
• Turn on the light and get out of bed. Perhaps have something
to drink and find something to distract you.
• Splash cool or cold water on your face, hands, and the back
of your neck. This will help you get more present and awake.
• Consciously slow your breathing. Try some breathing
exercises.
• Do some gentle stretching exercises to help your body
reorient to the present.
• If you have a pet, spend a little time petting or cuddling with
him or her.
• If you have physical symptoms, such as a bad taste in your
mouth, or pain or discomfort, be mindful in talking to
yourself inwardly as you do things to soothe yourself (for
instance, brush your teeth, have a noncaffeinated drink, suck
on a mint or hard candy, massage painful muscles): “I am in
the present now. Whatever happened to me is over. I am safe.
My mouth, my legs, my body, etc., are in the present. I am
doing all I can to help all parts of myself.” Try to be aware of
any internal sense of what might help.
• Some people find that it helps if they write down a distressing
dream or image and then put it away, tear it up, or bring it to
therapy. The idea is not to go further into the experience, but
to contain it by putting it on paper and leaving it until a more
appropriate time.
• You might try “changing” your nightmare. Add a supportive
or strong person to the dream, invent a way out of the
situation, or give yourself special powers to overcome any
sense of powerlessness or fear in the dream. Your therapist
may be able to help you with this kind of technique.

• Some people wake up from a nightmare and find they are
unable to move. Although this is extremely uncomfortable
and even frightening, it will not last for very long. It is
simply the state of being paralyzed by fear. If this happens to
you, make sure you have some anchors to the present visible
from every angle from the bed: on your left, your right, even
on the ceiling. Even though you cannot yet move, you can
begin to see the anchor and gradually perceive you are in the
present. This perception will help your body shift out of that
paralysis mode. Try starting with a tiny movement, for
instance, blinking your eyes, and just barely twitching your
toe or little finger. When you can do this, then move the
opposite toe or finger. Then make a slight movement with
your hand or foot, then your arms or legs. Continue slowly
and patiently until your entire body has become more able to
move.
Using Sleep Medication Appropriately
If you have persistent sleep difficulties in spite of trying these
solutions, make sure you are checked by your physician. There may
be medical reasons for your sleep issues. Sleep disorders often
accompany trauma-related disorders. Ask your doctor about
whether you may need a sleep medication. Check with your doctor
before you take any nonprescription medications or herbs, because
they may interfere with your prescribed medications. Many sleep
medications are addictive; thus, they should be taken only as
prescribed. They cannot be mixed with other types of sedatives or
with alcohol or drugs. Often, it is sufficient to use medication for a
couple of nights to get yourself in a routine and then stop taking
them until the next time you have trouble.

Homework Sheet 9.1
Sleep Record
Use the record below to record your sleep difficulties during the
following week.

Whar ame
id you go
to bed?

Whe ame
did you
wake up?

‘Whar difticulues,
ifany, did you
have with your
sleep during the

nigh?

How did you
uy whelp your.

‘trouble sleep.
ing?

‘What is he

total number

of hours you
slept?

Sauiay


Homework Sheet 9.2
Making Your Bedroom a Pleasant Place for Sleep
1. Check to make sure your bedroom feels comfortable for all parts
of you. Describe your thoughts, emotions, and sensations when you
look around the room.
2. List anything you can and want to change in your bedroom to
make it more comfortable. What would you or parts of you like to
change?
3. Describe any inner conflict about your bedroom.
4. Notice any items that might trigger you. Remove or change them
if you are able. If it is not possible to remove or change them, post
a little note that says something like, “All is well here and now,” to
remind you of the present. Also, intentionally notice the difference
in the context for the item in the present. For example, “This bed
reminds me of my bed as a child, but it is in my room, with my
linens, on my floor. It is just a bed, and beds cannot hurt or scare. It
is just a thing.”

Homework Sheet 9.3
Developing a Sleep Kit
Develop a “sleep kit,” a real or imagined box full of items that can
help to reassure and calm you and all parts of you and bring you
back to the here and now. You can use your sleep kit before you go
to bed or if you awaken during the night feeling anxious or
triggered. Your kit might include relaxing and soothing music or
sounds, anchoring items, a special pillow or blanket, a night light, a
favorite piece of clothing, a doll or stuffed animal, a wonderful
book, photographs of people who care for you, or of safe and
relaxing places, a list of people you can call if needed during an
emergency, a list of pleasant experiences, or even a pet that helps
you feel safe. Remember that it is important to take into account the
needs and preferences of all parts in developing your sleep kit. List
your sleep kit items below.

Homework Sheet 9.4
Developing a Bedtime Routine
1. Describe what helps you and all parts of yourself to unwind and
prepare for bed.
2. List activities you know you should avoid before bedtime.
3. Describe a routine that you have or would like to establish once
you get in bed (for instance, a short meditation, breathing exercises,
imagery, reading a nice story).
4. Describe the best way for you to check in with all parts of
yourself at bedtime, and remind yourself that you are safe and it is
now time to sleep safely and comfortably (for example, talking
inwardly, asking inside, imagining all parts in a circle or curled up
in nice beds).
5. Are you willing and able to go to bed and get up at
approximately the same time every day? List your approximate
bedtime and wake time. If you are not willing or able, please
describe the reasons below. Obstacles to a regular sleep routine are
important to address.

CHAPTER TEN
Establishing a Healthy Daily
Structure
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Exercises
• Break
• Topic: Establishing a Healthy Daily Structure
Introduction
Problems With Daily Structure for People With a
Complex Dissociative Disorder
Reflections on Developing a Healthy Daily Structure
Keeping Track of Time
Tips for Keeping Track of Time
Developing Healthy Work Habits
Reflections on Developing a New Healthy Daily
Structure
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Continue working on your sleep kit and bedtime
routine if needed.
Complete Homework Sheet 10.1, Your Current Daily
Structure.
Complete Homework Sheet 10.2, Developing a
Realistic and Healthy Daily Structure and Routine.
Introduction
A daily and weekly structure, with a balanced distribution of work,

activity, and leisure, is of great importance for everyone. A
satisfying life includes knowing how to enjoy working but also how
to enjoy and use to best advantage your leisure or free time.
Everyone does best with a daily structure that is consistent, but not
too rigid. Structure helps people keep track of time and of what
they are doing, so they can be more attentive and able to
concentrate, and less worried or confused about what comes next.
Structure may help reduce the risk of intrusion of, or switching
among, parts of the personality; it may also help reduce the risk of
prolonged flashbacks or sinking into depression. Everyone has the
need to start and complete certain tasks in a timely manner, to
manage a household, and to make relatively balanced choices about
how he or she spends free time.
Daily and weekly structures should include a regular time to get
up and go to bed, regular and healthy meals, necessary chores (for
instance, shopping, cooking, paying bills, cleaning), time for
relationships and social contacts, personal (“me”) time, inner
check-ins, physical exercise, fun, and other safely stimulating
activities, and so forth. In this chapter we will focus on tools for
establishing a daily structure, including keeping track of time,
healthy work habits, and using your leisure time to best advantage.
Problems With Daily Structure for People With a
Complex Dissociative Disorder
The establishment of a daily structure is often difficult for
individuals with a dissociative disorder for a number of the
following reasons:
• Disrupted time sense and an often chaotic and conflicted
inner world.
• Dissociative parts may fight for time and have many
conflicting wishes, needs, and preferences about how to
spend time.
• As a consequence, different parts may begin certain activities
but cannot finish because other parts interfere or shift to
another task.
• Difficulty concentrating and completing tasks.
• Problems with impulse control and difficulty finishing a task
that does not easily hold your attention, for instance,

cleaning, paying bills, studying.
• Structure and routine were often not something that was
modeled for you as a child, so you never learned how to
develop and keep a healthy structure and have not
experienced its benefits.
• You may have created an excessive and rigid structure,
incessantly going from one activity to the next, never taking a
rest, exhausting yourself (see also discussion that follows).
Finding a balance in your daily structure may present a big
challenge. Too much structure and busyness may be a way for you
to avoid feeling or knowing more about yourself or your inner
world. And perhaps it may be an attempt to feel competent by
doing “everything” or to prevent other parts from taking over from
you. But excessive busyness can deplete you more than you might
be aware.
On the other hand, if you have too little structure, problematic
symptoms can increase dramatically. Perhaps it is difficult for you
to decide exactly what you would like to do, or you have no idea
what you want or need to do, and thus plan nothing for the day.
You may notice that you have a more difficult time on totally
unstructured days, especially on the weekends. You may start and
stop a number of different tasks without finishing anything. This
“start-stop” behavior, often due to the interference of parts, leaves
all parts of you burdened by yet more unfinished business,
depleting your energy further. Or perhaps you feel unmotivated to
do anything, and just sit, watch TV, play computer games, or sleep.
For people with DID, some parts may be active at the expense
of others, so that they lose time and do things that they were not
intending to do, for instance, painting or watching TV instead of
completing tasks that need to be done, such as cleaning the house.
And without inner communication and cooperation, the activities
and plans of some parts may overlap and interfere with those of
other parts of yourself. Then you may find yourself overcommitted,
adding to a sense of being overwhelmed and conflicted.
Reflections on Developing a Healthy Daily Structure
Make a list of your basic daily tasks, for example, work or
volunteer time, taking care of children, cleaning, shopping and

other errands, cooking, laundry, paying bills, taking care of pets,
gardening or yard work, and so on. If more than one part of you is
engaged in these tasks, set aside some quiet time to communicate
and coordinate a reasonable schedule. The following questions may
be important as part of your inner reflection:
• Are there specific tasks that cause inner problems among
parts? For example, is a part triggered by caring for children,
or overwhelmed by the many choices presented to you in the
grocery store, or too impulsive to deal with spending money?
• If there are inner problems evoked by a certain task, which
seem the easiest to solve? Begin with that problem and as
you gain more confidence and practice with inner
communication and cooperation, you may move to the next
problem. Remember to be patient: You cannot change
everything at once, and no one expects you to do so.
• Do you or parts of you have a tendency to have too much
structure and exhaust yourself? If so, see if you can notice
why, for example, avoiding feelings or memories, feeling
pressured to achieve, afraid to stop, and so forth.
• What might be the benefits to you and other parts of you if
you were more flexible with your daily structure? For
example, better capacity to tolerate emotions, permission not
to work so hard, and the like.
• What activities are important for you as a whole person?
Negotiate with parts inside to plan a set number of activities
each week that is comfortable and reasonable to you and all
parts of you, not too many and not too few. If you are overly
active and busy, make sure you plan for down time between
engagements. And be sure to plan for the time it takes to get
from one place to another without having to rush.
• Do you or parts of you have too little structure? If so, see if
you can determine why. For example, some people are too
depressed or tired to provide themselves with structure to do
anything; others may not know where to start or how to use
structure, and so on.
• What might parts of you need in order to develop more
structure? For example, more support from other people or
from parts inside, some suggestions for structure, and so
forth.

• Would you be willing to push just a little to do one or two
activities each day?
• If you decide to develop a new structure or routine, do not
criticize yourself or other parts if you are not able to keep it
all the time. Just try again! You do not have to be perfect to
be successful. For most people, it takes several months (and
sometimes even more) to make a new routine become a more
automatic habit.
Additional Tips
• Everyone needs time for relaxation and pleasure. Make time
for yourself and for parts of yourself every day, preferably
during the day or in the early evening, not at bedtime (see
chapter 11).
• Everyone needs time for personal reflection and inner
deliberation. Some people with a dissociative disorder find it
helpful to have an inner meeting with parts of themselves to
discuss daily routines, plans, and so forth (see chapter 27).
• Engage in some type of physical exercise every day (cycling,
walking, or some other form of activity). Try to go outside
every day and get 15 to 20 minutes of sun.
• Try to have contact with other people at least several times a
week, especially if you live alone. Isolating yourself is often
a habit that is not helpful. Be aware of when you want to
isolate and intentionally make plans with friends or
acquaintances instead, or just walk around where people are
nearby, for example, in a park or a mall.
• If you tend to lose yourself in an activity, try setting an alarm
to stay aware of time. Virtually every personal electronic
device now has reminder alerts that can be set.
• If you are living with someone else, you will both benefit by
having clear and fixed arrangements about who does which
chores. Fuzzy arrangements and lack of clarity can cause
irritation and resentment. You may need to be assertive to
make sure you have personal time for yourself and your
parts, and to make sure the tasks are distributed fairly.
• Many books and Web sites are dedicated to offering practical
tips for organization, routines, and structure. Make use of
these as needed. Personal organizers, trained individuals who

help with your daily organization, are also available in most
areas.
Keeping Track of Time
A sense of time is essential to maintain structure and routines, but
when you have a dissociative disorder, an accurate time sense and
adequate time management are often problems. It is as though some
parts of you do not live in time and even have trouble
understanding the concept of time (Van der Hart & Steele, 1997).
Time can seem too fast or too slow, gaps of lost time make it hard
to keep track of the day, time may not be experienced at all, and
time sense may differ among various dissociative parts. All these
problems with a sense of time lead to confusion. In addition, many
people with a dissociative disorder have trouble with time
management due to problems with executive functioning, that is,
with planning, organizing, sequencing, and prioritizing abilities.
Tips for Keeping Track of Time
• Use a diary, a calendar, or a planning board, or all three (even
if you feel there is inner conflict about planning). Keep your
calendar in a place where you will see it every day. Mark off
days as they pass so you can easily find the day and date.
• If you have DID and lose time, written communication may
help all parts of you begin to coordinate a single schedule.
Invite parts to use the same planning tool. And the more you
have inner agreement about a schedule, the better you will be
able to keep it. Try to plan one week at a time.
• Put important reminders on your calendar, for instance, due
dates for bills and taxes, appointments, and errands to run
during the week.
• Wear a watch, so you can keep track of hours. Preferably use
a watch that has an alarm, so you can set it as a reminder for
appointments or tasks. Some people prefer to use their cell
phone to track time instead of a watch; that is fine, too, but a
watch on your wrist is a visual reminder to check the time,
perhaps more so than your phone.
• When you have an appointment, set a reminder alarm for 15
minutes before you should leave to make it on time. For

example, if it will take you 30 minutes to drive to your
therapist, set your alarm to remind you that your appointment
is in 45 minutes. Do not allow yourself to get involved in
another task before you leave.
• Keep a list of things to do and appointments posted on your
refrigerator or calendar, which you will see every day.
• Put a colored hair band around your wrist to remind you that
you need to do something.
• If you tend to lose lists, keep them in a single notebook used
only for that purpose and keep the notebook in the same
place at all times. Make an agreement among parts not to
hide or destroy the notebook.
• Before going to the store, make a list of what you need that is
agreeable to all parts of you, so you need not spend hours
shopping or overspend. Only buy what is on your list; then
leave.
• If you have trouble remembering when and if you have taken
your medication (if you take any), buy a weekly pill
organizer box, available at any pharmacy. Each week, put
your medications in the appropriate box, and you can check
the box to see whether you have taken them. Set an alarm to
take your medication, if necessary.
• If you have DID, you may find some part of you is able to
keep good time and can remind you.
Developing Healthy Work Habits
Whether people go to a job each day, or whether they work at
home, raise children, or volunteer, they all need healthy work
habits. This includes the ability to concentrate and focus, organize
one’s work, start and stop activities on time, and balance work with
other important life priorities. People who work too much set up a
lifestyle of chronic exhaustion, rigidity, and imbalance, which
makes them more vulnerable to switching, flashbacks, and periods
of poor functioning. People who are unable to work generally do
not feel very worthwhile and may be unable to take care of
themselves financially. The resulting stress can lead to increased
symptoms and difficulties.
People often have particular dissociative parts that deal with
work, while other parts may be unaware of work. Some parts may

sabotage or interfere with work or projects, or prefer to play instead
of work. And parts living in trauma-time may become triggered by
various situations at work, such as an angry or irritated boss.
Dissociative parts that are focused solely on work typically are
not sufficiently aware of your body to know when you are tired or
stressed; thus, they tend to overdo. On the whole, such parts may
not be particularly interested in “cooperation” and slowing down
but are often only focused on a work goal that needs to be
accomplished. This is hardly surprising, because such parts likely
use work as a protection against the intrusion of painful memories
or the realization of a painful past, or against dealing with other
dissociative parts that might not be appropriate at work.
All people need to feel successful at their work, whatever it is,
because success helps us feel competent and good about ourselves.
It is thus understandable that people with dissociative disorders do
not want to take the risk of losing that area of competence and thus
are reluctant to decrease the barriers that protect parts that are able
to work. But as noted earlier, overworking prevents you from
having to cope with and confront your inner world. Thus, “staying
busy” and forcing yourself to do more and more is a very common
form of unhealthy coping. To heal, you must develop inner
collaboration to balance yourself in life and cope more effectively.
Reflections on Developing a New Healthy Daily
Structure
• Reflect on how you would like to ideally and realistically
spend your time. Please note if there are conflicts among
parts of you about how to spend time.
• What are your priorities about which activities you would
like to spend your time (for instance, work, being with
friends, play, reading)?
• When do you need more or less structure? Weekends?
Evenings? Daytime? Holidays?
• Are there particular times of day that are especially hard for
you? If so, imagine what changes you could make in your
routines and structure to help you (see chapter 16 on planning
to cope with difficult times).
• Consider how much time you can or should spend on work or

tasks in a given day.
• Notice how your time is distributed among work/chores, and
leisure/social time, play and rest, and personal (“me”) time.
• Reflect on how to give yourself meaningful private time for
tending to your inner needs (including those of other parts of
you). This should include time for inner reflection and
contact with parts of yourself. How might you structure that
time to be fair and agreeable to all parts of yourself?
• Consider which activities give you energy or drain you of
energy. Try to cooperate with all parts of yourself to set a
realistic daily pace, given your energy level and the amount
of energy your activities give or demand of you.
• Take into account other ways to balance your life, for
example, exercise, socializing, getting out of the house,
enjoying a hobby.

Homework Sheet 10.1
Your Current Daily Structure
Describe your current daily structure and routines so you assess
what is working well for you and what might need to be different.
Include the approximate amount of time you spend in each of the
four categories listed below. You do not have to go into detail.
1. Work / tasks / chores / appointments / meals
2. Leisure and social time, for instance, hobbies, being with friends
or family
3. Personal time for yourself, including inner reflection and
communication with parts
4. Do nothing; that is, watch mindless TV, surf the Internet, play
video games, stare at the wall, sleep, and so on
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday

Homework Sheet 10.2
Developing a Realistic and Healthy Daily Structure and
Routine
Now describe a realistic and healthy structure and routine that you
would like to develop in the next few months. Before you begin,
you may want to refer back to the earlier section on reflections for
helping you develop your new structure and routine. Remember to
change only one thing at a time so you will not become
overwhelmed or discouraged.
1. Work / tasks / chores / appointments / meals
2. Leisure and social time, for instance, hobbies, being with friends
or acquaintances
3. Personal time for yourself, including inner reflection and
communication with parts
4. Do nothing; that is, watch mindless TV, surf the Internet, play
video games, stare at the wall, sleep, and so on
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday

CHAPTER ELEVEN
Free Time and Relaxation
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Topic: Free Time and Relaxation
Introduction
Problems With Free Time and Relaxation for People
With a Complex Dissociative Disorder
Tips for Resolving Inner Conflicts About Relaxation
and Free Time
Tips for Managing Free Time
Learning to Safely Relax
Relaxation Exercises
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Practice the relaxation exercises.
Complete Homework Sheet 11.1, Developing a
Relaxation Kit.
Complete Homework Sheet 11.2, Exploring Inner
Obstacles to Leisure Time and Relaxation.
Introduction
We all need time to safely relax and do what we like. An essential
part of your healing is learning to make use of free time for
relaxation, rejuvenation, fun, and new interests. Learning, laughing,
having fun, and being curious all help maintain balance and
perspective in daily life. In the same way as with balancing work,
people with dissociative disorders need to find the right distribution
of their free time, including personal time to communicate and

work with inner parts. However, for traumatized individuals, a
number of factors may impede the use of what should be healing
relaxation and leisure time.
Problems With Free Time and Relaxation for People
With a Complex Dissociative Disorder
You may find that you avoid free time, relaxation, or leisure
activities, even though other people generally find them to be
rejuvenating and essential. Such unstructured times may present an
opportunity for the inner turmoil and distress that you avoid to rise
up into your awareness. And perhaps you have developed negative
beliefs and fears about free time or relaxation. Thus, you may
encounter some of the following difficulties:
• If you try to relax, you may be afraid of losing control,
becoming overwhelmed, or of having other parts of you take
control.
• Various parts may have different needs and wishes about
leisure time, resulting in conflicts about how you should
spend your free time. And at times, some part might believe
that a particular activity, such as relaxing, is dangerous and
thus inhibits other parts from engaging in it. Ongoing
conflicts may sometimes result in a “stalemate” in which you
do not do anything at all.
• Free time (for instance, weekends, holidays) may trigger
memories of painful past experiences, making it more
difficult to enjoy your time in the present (see chapter 16).
• You may have inner feelings or voices that prohibit pleasure,
enjoyment, or play. Perhaps these messages are shame based,
coming from a belief that you do not deserve to feel good or
that you are lazy. Or they may be based on a fear that you
will “get in trouble” or that “bad things always happen when
you are feeling good.”
• You, or some parts of you, may be afraid to “let down your
guard.” That is, you feel a strong need to be on high alert all
the time and thus find it impossible to relax. In fact, attempts
to relax may actually increase a feeling of being vulnerable
or unsafe.

The most effective way to deal with inner conflicts about how
to spend your free time is to reflect on the inner concerns, beliefs,
and needs of all parts of yourself. And then, as with all other inner
conflicts, steadily learn to empathize, negotiate, and cooperate
about your leisure time. Of course, it is important to be realistic and
reasonable about what you are able to do: Work, play,
relationships, and relaxation must be balanced and within your
capacity as a whole person. For example, you cannot stay up
having fun all night and expect to go to work and be at your best
the next day. Nor can you work excessively long hours each day
and expect yourself to have quality time for inner reflection and
care for inner parts of yourself. Always consider your
commitments, budget, and energy level in planning your free time.
Tips for Resolving Inner Conflicts About Relaxation
and Free Time
If you experience some of the conflicts described earlier or in
Homework Sheet 11.2 (at the end of this chapter) about free time
and relaxation, try some of the following suggestions to help you
resolve them:
• Take time to reflect on why you might be having difficulties
with free time or relaxation and make a list of these
obstacles.
• Do not judge yourself about these conflicts; just notice them.
• Prioritize as best you can from the least to the most difficult
conflicts on your list. Begin with the least difficult and
gradually work your way through to the most difficult. As
you gain mastery with resolving the less intense conflicts,
you and all parts of yourself become more confident and
trusting with each other, and they will be more willing to take
the next steps.
• Using an inner safe space, meeting room, or by talking
inwardly, determine whether all parts of you might agree that
relaxation might be a good thing if it were completely safe
and allowed. If so, good: You can take the next step. If not,
stop and reflect on why parts of you believe relaxing would
not be helpful even if it were safe and allowed.
• Let yourself imagine, all parts of you, a foreign land in which

relaxation and free time are encouraged as a natural part of
every day. In this land, everyone works hard, but they also
play hard. No one is in a hurry. No one is critical of others.
No one is punished. Imagine yourself watching people in this
foreign land as they relax, rest, laugh, play, and enjoy
themselves after work. Notice how this image affects all parts
of you.
• You might talk inwardly to remind all parts of you that when
you (all of you) feel safe and relaxed in a safe environment,
there is less chaos and noise inside. All parts might benefit.
Critical or angry parts might find they have to spend less
energy managing young parts of yourself if those parts feel
safe and more relaxed, and even have fun.
• Remind all parts that enjoying relaxation and free time does
not mean you are lazy or not completing your work. It is well
known that people who take time off to relax and rest are
more productive and effective when they do work.
• Remind all parts that it is possible to be alert and relaxed at
the same time.
• If parts continue to feel unsafe in relaxing, ask whether
perhaps one part of you might remain “on guard” while other
parts of you rest. Various parts of you could take turns with
“guard duty” so that each part of you has rest times.
• Make sure you take time to orient all parts to the present and
reassure them that relaxation and free time are allowed and
healthy, and you will not get in trouble for taking some time
for yourself.
• If traumatic memories or intense emotions are triggered when
you have free time, help vulnerable parts to stay in a safe
place during that time, assuring them that they will be
attended to in the near future. And continue to orient them to
the present. Be sure to keep such promises as all parts must
learn to trust each other.
• Engage in inner discussions and negotiation about what to do
in your free time. If there are conflicts, try taking turns, doing
one activity one time, and another activity the next time. Or
try finding activities that are enjoyable to all parts of you (or
at least acceptable). Negotiate healthy “deals” internally. For
example, if a critical part allows you an hour of free time
without complaint, agree that you will work on a specific task

in return after your free time. Be sure to follow through.
• Take small steps. For example, practice relaxation for 1
minute, if 10 minutes is too much. Or 30 seconds if a minute
is too much. Go only as fast as the slowest part of you, while
always helping such parts by giving them the resources they
need to take a step. Above all, do not be critical of yourself or
other parts of you.
Next you will find some tips on relaxing safely and using your free
time effectively.
Tips for Managing Free Time
• Schedule some free time for yourself every day. Begin by
structuring small amounts of free time, for example, 30
minutes or an hour (less if this amount is not tolerable).
• Become more aware of what activities you, and other parts of
you, might like to do or what you would like to learn to do
for enjoyment. Do not eliminate ideas with arguments about
why you cannot do them. Try to be open to new possibilities
and help other parts be open to trying something new as well.
• Make a list of what you might like to do. Setting aside
differences, are there any activities that all parts of you might
enjoy? Start with one of these activities first.
• If you avoid free time or relaxation, reflect and ask yourself
(or other parts that might be involved) of what you are afraid
or ashamed.
• If you have too much unstructured free time, be willing to
add more activities and use your time toward healing, for
instance, by attending to parts of yourself that need your care.
• If you have no idea what you want to do, notice what other
people do and see whether something appeals to you. Try
taking an art class, volunteering, hiking, or joining a choir.
Do not wait until you are sure about an activity. Try it, and if
you do not like it, you can always stop. Remember that trying
new things is a great way to learn whether you like them and
to have fun in the process.
• Try not to worry about failing. The task is to enjoy learning,
even if you do not do something well.

• Be persistent and patient with yourself.
Learning to Safely Relax
People who have been traumatized often find it difficult to relax,
because they, or at least some parts of themselves, are almost
always on high alert. They may feel it is not safe to relax because
they would not be able to notice danger. But in reality, relaxation
occurs at many levels of awareness and alertness. A person can be
extremely relaxed, present, and alert or relaxed in a drowsy kind of
way. Being simultaneously alert and relaxed is actually the most
adaptive and flexible way to be most of the time. Parts of you can
help each other to realize this state of mind. In chapter 8, you
learned how to begin to develop an inner sense of safety. That
sense of safety is a foundation that will allow you to learn to relax
more effectively and easily.
To practice relaxation, try one of the following exercises at a
time when you are not pressured to do something or go somewhere,
and when your mind is relatively quiet.
Once you become accustomed to practicing an exercise and are
able to relax, begin using it when you are tired, stressed, or feeling
low. The earlier you intervene with yourself by helping yourself
feel calmer, the more effective the exercise. The following imagery
exercises are meant to help you and all parts of yourself feel better,
stronger, and to regain more emotional balance.
Try making an audio file of one of these exercises so you can
listen to it when you choose. You can do it yourself, or perhaps ask
your therapist or a friend or partner to make it for you. Play around
with the wording first, so that it fits just exactly right for you and
all parts of yourself.
Try one or more of the following exercises. Read through them
first to see whether one is especially appealing to you. If you wish,
you can change the setting (that is, imagine a mountain instead of a
safe tree; a forest instead of a healing pool).
RELAXATION EXERCISES
The Tree

Sit or lie down somewhere quiet and pleasant and breathe
quietly, closing your eyes safely. Remind all parts of you that
you are safe and that you are working to help each part of you
feel better. Invite all parts to participate. If some parts do not
wish to do so, they may watch from a distance or go to their
own safe place. Gradually direct all parts of you that want to
participate to an imagined scene. This place is a quiet and safe
spot in the open air with beautiful scenery, just the right
temperature, in your favorite season of the year. And around
you, you see magnificent trees, resplendent in their green
finery. Look around slowly for a tree that appeals to you, one
that almost seems to invite you to become acquainted. Perhaps
it is a tree standing alone, tall and proud, or perhaps a tree in a
forest, one of many in a wise and strong community of trees.
Your tree may be short or tall, fat or thin, young or old, firm or
willowy. Take your time to choose your tree and remember that
you can always change to another tree if and when you wish.
Some parts of you may want to choose different trees, each
having their own, and of course, this is just fine. Once you, all
parts of you, have a clear image of your special tree, take your
time to examine it carefully. Notice its shape and texture, its
warm wood scent and palette of colors. Become aware of the
branches spreading out to shelter you, the leafy, soothing green
that extends an invitation for you to relax and rest. Take your
tree in until it becomes a natural memory, indelible in your
mind.
Walk up to your tree and get acquainted. Begin by exploring
the trunk and all its nooks and crannies. Run your hand over
the bark. Notice any knotholes or hollows. Put your arms
around your tree; notice if you can get your arms right round it,
or whether it is so thick you cannot encircle it. Lean up against
your tree. Feel its strength, solid and unyielding, protective and
grounding. If you wish, you can sit under your tree, with your
back comfortably against it, with confidence that it will support
you no matter how hard you lean. Now notice that your tree is
not standing on its own. It has powerful roots that go deep and
deeper, and deeper still into the earth, anchoring it to the
ground, and drawing sustenance up and up, all through the
tree, to the tiptop. Your tree is always grounded and dwells in
the present, its rich history inscribed in its rings, and its
branches ready for the winds that blow. It fears neither fair
weather nor foul, bending with the storm, swaying with the
breeze, resting under the heavens when all is quiet and still. In
rain and wind, sun and snow, storm and showers: always
steady and grounded. Feel this stalwart and faithful presence in

your mind, in your body, and in your heart. Let you and all parts
of you feel rooted to the earth with your tree. Let you and all
parts of you feel the power and strength, the grounding and
readiness to meet what is, and what shall come, unwavering
and constant. Let yourself feel the power of your tree with its
enormous root system, connected to the earth.
Now draw your attention upwards, to the branches and
boughs, to the limbs and leaves. Each branch is unique, each
weaving with the other to design beautiful foliage that is never
exactly the same from day to day and year to year. The leaves
take in light and create energy. They provide you with shelter
and shade, safety and soothing, their gentle rustle a pleasant
sound in your ears. The play of shadow and light as the
branches move is pleasant to your eyes, giving you a sense
that all is right with the world. You may even want to climb your
tree and sit on one of those branches, gleefully swinging your
legs or thoughtfully surveying your world from up there.
Perhaps you take a nap in the shady haven of your tree. It is a
good, grounding, safe feeling, being with your tree.
Your tree is a refuge where birds may safely nest, small
animals may shelter from the elements, where a tree house
might be built, or a swing hung from its boughs. It is a hideout
that no one can see, that is just for you, where you can retreat
whenever you wish. The strength and beauty and peacefulness
of your magnificent tree give you a feeling of protection and
sturdiness. You, and any parts of you, can go there whenever
you like; you can picture it in your mind and look at it, lean
against it, or hide in it, as you wish or need.
The Healing Pool
Imagine a beautiful pool of water with just the right
surroundings. Perhaps you discover it in a quiet forest, or
nestled in the mountains, or in the midst of a meadow. The air
around it is fresh, clean, and just the right temperature for you.
The season of the year is your favorite. Perhaps it is spring,
with all living things blooming and growing. Perhaps it is
summer, lazy and languid. Or perhaps it is autumn, cool and
crisp. Or perhaps it is winter, a soft blanket of white on the
ground. The water is beautiful, inviting. Perhaps it is still, gently
fed by deep springs, reflecting back to you the sky or trees
above. Perhaps it is flowing and bubbling, at the bottom of a
waterfall or fed by rivers or streams. It may be shallow or deep,
or both at once. It is pleasant to watch, its freshness smells

joyful and clean. So pleasant that you feel almost drawn to its
safety and soothing. The sounds around you are delightful:
rustling trees or meadow grass, the bubble and babble of water,
happy little animal sounds, and birds calling out joyfully. Notice
what is right for you. Take your time to notice your pool, its
shape, its surroundings, its depth, whether there are little fishes
or just clean, fresh water. Perhaps it is a shimmering blue or
sparkling green, or clear as a crystal. The light dances and
skips across the water and back again to you, inviting you to
take it all deeply in. This water calls you to relax, to feel utter
and complete contentment and safety. It is healing water, the
kind that soothes the sorest body and satiates the thirstiest
soul. It refreshes the worn-out mind, a balm for wounds of the
heart. When you are ready, allow all parts of yourself to explore
your pool and take in its healing energy. Perhaps some parts of
you would like to sit thoughtfully next to the water, while some
might dangle their feet, their toes dabbling in the water. Some
might get in and sit or even float. In fact, you become aware
that the water in this pool is the most special you have ever
encountered. It buoys you up so you cannot sink. It supports
you as you sit, as though you were leaning back into loving
arms. It nurtures and soothes, calms and restores, filling you
with a peace and a lightness so sweet and splendid that you
take it deeply within yourself, to each part of you, to every nook
and cranny of pain and stress and sorrow. Let your tension and
fear, your burdensome shame and worries be drawn from you
to the water and carried away. Let the water surround you, flow
around you, refreshing, relaxing, restoring every part of you. Let
the water surround you, flow around you. Feel it soothing your
body, your mind, your heart. You may remain as long as you
like, until every part of you can feel its gentle healing power.
This is your pool, where all parts of you can come as they
please. It is your special place of healing and hope, soothing
and safety, relief and release. It is yours and yours alone to
have within you, a wellspring of well-being.
If it is hard for you to use imagery for relaxation, try this exercise:
Physical Relaxation
Sit or lie comfortably. Take a deep breath in through your
nose to a slow count of three, hold for three counts, and
breathe out slowly through pursed lips for three counts. Repeat
three times. Now take in a deep breath and tighten every

muscle in your body as tight as you can from head to toe, hold
to the count of five, and let go, breathing out as deeply as you
can and intentionally relaxing your muscles as much as you
can. Repeat the three deep breaths from the beginning of the
exercise. Then again take in a deep breath and tighten all your
muscles for the count of five, let go and relax, repeat the three
deep breaths. Continue until you feel physically relaxed.
Progressive Muscle Relaxation Technique
The following exercise is a well-known technique that might help
you gradually relax your entire body (Jacobson, 1974). When you
are anxious or fearful, your body becomes tense and you may
experience symptoms such as pain in your neck, shoulders, or back,
tension headaches, tight jaws, tensed muscles in legs or arms, and
sometimes your whole body may seize up. To train yourself to
progressively relax, you will begin by tensing specific groups of
muscles and then releasing the tension; focus on the differences
between the feelings of tension and relaxation of each group of
muscles. You will practice with one area of your body at a time:
head and face, neck, shoulders, back, pelvis, arms and hands, legs
and feet. If you have any injuries, skip that area of your body if
needed. Parts of you may or may not want to participate. As
always, pace yourself and do not force any part of you. Spend some
time collaborating internally to reach an agreement that is
acceptable for all parts of you.
Sit or lie comfortably in a quiet and safe place where you
will not be interrupted. You will tense and relax each muscle
group twice, taking a short break of about 30 seconds between
each cycle, and then move to the next area. When tensing a
muscle group, hold for about 5 seconds, then release and rest
for about 10 seconds. If you wish, you can combine this
exercise with one of the ones described earlier or with your
inner safe space.
• Begin by focusing on your hands. Clench your fists,
feel the tension of your muscles for 5 seconds, and
then release 10 seconds. Concentrate on the
differences between tension and release. Repeat
once more.
• Now focus on your arms, draw your forearms toward
your shoulder, feel the tension in your biceps (5

seconds), and then let go and relax (10 seconds).
Concentrate on the differences between tension and
release. Repeat once more.
• Tighten your triceps—muscles on the underside of
your upper arms—by stretching your arms out
straight and locking your elbows. Feel the tension in
your triceps and then let go, relaxing your arms.
Concentrate on the differences between tension and
release. Repeat this once more. As your arms relax,
just let them lie by your side or rest on the chair.
• Next, concentrate on your face. Tense the muscles
in your forehead by raising your eyebrows as far as
you can, feel the tension in your face and eyebrows,
hold and then relax. And again, concentrate on the
differences between tension and release. Repeat a
second time.
• Tense the muscles around your eyes by squeezing
them tightly shut and then relax. Observe the
different sensations when you tense and when you
relax your eyes. Repeat.
• Tighten your jaws by opening your mouth as wide as
possible, hold and then relax. Repeat.
• Focus on the muscles in your neck, bow your head,
your chin on your chest, then turn your head slowly
to the left, return to the center line and lean your
head back as far as it will go, then again return your
head to its normal position. Turn your head to the
right and then again to the normal position. Repeat
this slowly and carefully, since there is often a lot of
tension in your neck. And again, concentrate on the
differences between tension and release.
• Focus on your shoulders. Raise them as though you
were going to touch your ears, hold and feel the
tension, and then relax. Focus on the different
sensations between tension and relaxation of your
shoulders. Repeat.
• Then focus on your shoulder blades; pull your
shoulder blades back as though you want them to
touch them together. Tense and release. Notice the
difference between the tension and release. Repeat.

• Stretch your back by sitting up very straight, tighten
and let go, then relax. Repeat and focus on the
different sensations between tension and relaxation.
• Tighten your buttocks by squeezing them together,
hold, and then relax. Repeat.
• Hold your breath, pull your belly in, tighten it, and
relax. Repeat and feel the difference in your
stomach and belly.
• Now focus on your legs. Stretch your legs out and
feel the tension in the muscles of your thighs, hold
on, and then relax your legs. Notice the difference
between tension and release. Repeat.
• Now extend your legs and point your toes back
towards you. Feel the tension in your calves and
feel the relaxation after you let go. Repeat.
• Finally focus on your feet. Point your toes down as
far as possible and feel the tension in the muscles of
your feet; tighten them and then relax. Observe the
different sensations when you tense and when you
relax the muscles in your feet.
• Now scan your whole body mentally and look for
any residual tension. If a particular muscle group is
still tense, return to this area once more.
• Now imagine that relaxation is spreading through
your whole body; your body may feel warm, a bit
heavy, and very safe and relaxed.

Homework Sheet 11.1
Developing a Relaxation Kit
In the same way that you developed a sleep kit in chapter 9, you
may design your own “relaxation kit.”
1. Begin by making a list below of activities and exercises, music,
or other items or experiences that are enjoyable or fun. List things
you imagine would be enjoyable and relaxing, even if you have not
tried them yet. Make sure to take into account the different needs
and desires of all parts of yourself. Highlight any activities that
might be agreeable to all parts of yourself, that is, that you can
enjoy as a whole person.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

10.
2. Just as you did with your sleep kit, you may make a special box
or basket with various items for your relaxation and comfort, for
example, music CDs, relaxing videos, special bath salts, pleasant
lotions, a comfortable shawl or sweater, a pair of old slippers, warm
socks, candles, special teas or coffees, healthy snacks, a good book,
favorite photos, or mementos.
3. List one or two new activities you would be willing to try for
relaxation or fun.
4. Describe any inner obstacles to trying these activities.

Homework Sheet 11.2
Exploring Inner Obstacles to Leisure Time and
Relaxation
You may find it difficult to enjoy your free time or to relax. Below
you will find common reasons why this might be so. Check or
circle any that apply and then complete the questions at the end.
You (or a part of you):
• Do not feel comfortable with or know how to “play.”
• Do not like to move your body, so you avoid leisure activities
that require any physical exertion.
• Are afraid or ashamed of the feeling of excitement.
• Are afraid or ashamed of the feeling of enjoyment.
• Believe enjoyment is dangerous or bad.
• Believe you do not deserve to relax or feel good.
• Feel out of control when you are excited or enjoying yourself.
• Are afraid you will fail at any leisure activities.
• Are afraid people will ridicule you.
• Are afraid someone will criticize what you are doing.
• Feel that people will not take you seriously.
• Have a belief that having free time means you are lazy or not
working hard enough.
• Fear that you will be punished if you have a good time.
• Fear that something bad will happen if you enjoy yourself.
• Fear that if you relax, you will not be able to notice danger.
• Find that certain words, such as “relax,” “enjoy,” “pleasure,”
or “play,” are a trigger.
• Experience flashbacks as soon as you start to relax.
• Have panic or serious anxiety as soon as you start to relax.
• Become immediately depressed when you try to relax.
• Feel too much pressure to work and feel guilty or
preoccupied if you try to relax.
• Have inner conflict among parts about relaxation and leisure
time.
• Have trouble being alone, and thus relaxation is more
difficult.
• Other? If so, please describe.

1. Using the list above, and reflecting on other possible reasons,
describe two or three fears, concerns, or beliefs that you, or parts of
you, have that impede your ability to relax and enjoy free time. You
may also refer back to #4 of the previous homework assignment,
where you listed obstacles to trying a new leisure activity.
2. Using the section in this chapter, Tips for Resolving Inner
Conflicts about Relaxation and Free Time, spend time identifying
inner common ground for relaxation and free time. (For example,
all parts might agree to practice relaxation exercises for 15 minutes
each day this week and see if it is helpful. If so, you can negotiate a
next step. If not, parts can discuss what is not agreeable and why,
and renegotiate.) Describe your inner communication and
negotiation below, as well as what worked and did not work for
you.

CHAPTER TWELVE
Physical Self-Care
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Topic: Physical Self-Care
Introduction
Factors Affecting Your Body Awareness and Physical
Self-Care
Managing Alcohol, Illicit Drugs, and Prescribed
Medications
Regulating Your Physical Energy
Tips for Resolving Inner Conflicts About Physical
Self-Care
Tips for Improving Your Physical Self-Care
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 12.1, Physical Self-Care
Questionnaire.
Complete Homework Sheet 12.2, Making a Healthy
Change in Physical Self-Care.
Introduction
Taking care of your body and maintaining your physical health are
important aspects of healing and living well. Your body is not
separate from you, even though it may feel like a “thing” with
which you do not want to bother sometimes. But your body is you,
and you are your body. Your emotions involve physiological
changes in your body that produce physical sensations and
movements; your beliefs and perceptions are mirrored in your

posture, movements, and level of physical arousal. Your physical
health affects your mental health, and vice versa. Many people who
have experienced childhood abuse and neglect avoid dealing with
their bodies or even find them disgusting or terrifying. Healing
comes through more compassionate acceptance of mind and body
as one together. This acceptance is not always easy or quick to
accomplish, but it is an important goal for you and parts of
yourself. In this chapter we will discuss some basic ways to care for
yourself physically and overcome some of your reluctance about
dealing with your body.
Factors Affecting Your Body Awareness and
Physical Self-Care
People with a dissociative disorder may have many reasons for
avoiding their bodies and neglecting physical self-care. In the
following sections we discuss some of the major factors, which you
may recognize for yourself.
Basic Physical Self-Care Was Never Learned
Some families neither practice nor teach their children basic
physical self-care. Such children may not have ever been taught to
care for their bodies, to prevent disease, to eat healthily and
exercise, to get routine medical and dental checkups, or to
recognize symptoms that require a visit to the doctor. These skills
can be acquired with practice, attention, and persistence, and you
can find a multitude of readily available resources on physical self-
care.
The Body Is Perceived as an Object of Fear, Hatred, Disgust,
or Shame
Many people with a dissociative disorder, or at least some parts of
them, find their bodies repulsive. There is no enjoyment of their
physical being, and their bodies feel alien to them, a burden, and a
reason for others to find them undesirable. They tend to avoid
certain physical sensations, movements, or postures. They often
perceive their bodies as objects, not as an integral part of existence.
In addition, control issues can be evoked if people do not feel well
and cannot function in the way that they want or find they are
physically weaker or less attractive than they wish. The body can

seem like an enemy when it is expected to be perfect and function
like a machine.
When people are abused by others, they often experience
physical pain in their bodies, as well as emotional pain. And of
course, emotional pain can be experienced intensely at the physical
level of the body. Thus, survivors sometimes condition themselves
to avoid their bodies in order to avoid pain and suffering.
Others tend to blame their bodies as the reason they were
abused and thus feel terrible shame. For example, people may
believe that if only their bodies had been stronger, they could have
stopped the abuse. They blame their bodies for what happened,
instead of accepting that they were too young to stop what
happened. And sometimes, certain parts of the personality may
hold this belief, while others may not.
Some people who were sexually abused may have been told
that their bodies were beautiful and thus blame themselves for what
happened: “If only I had not been so pretty!” They may develop
shame and hatred for their bodies. For example, some women (or
parts of themselves) come to hate anything feminine about their
bodies. They have associated being female with being abused:
“Girls get abused; therefore, I hate being a girl. My body is bad
because it is female.”
Dissociation Involves Altered Physical Sensations
Dissociation not only involves mental symptoms but also physical
ones, some of which are intense and uncomfortable. On the other
hand, dissociation may involve physical numbness or diminished
pain sensitivity. You may want to review some of these symptoms
in chapter 2. Dissociative parts of the personality that are stuck in
the past may reexperience in the present some physical sensations
related to past trauma, such as pain or cold. Such seemingly
“unexplained” intrusive sensations can be frightening and
confusing, and thus people may become increasingly avoidant and
unaware of their bodies. Some people have difficulty distinguishing
between physical pain that is the result of an injury or illness in the
present and pain that is a reexperience of the past. If you are not
sure whether a certain symptom stems from a traumatic experience
or is associated with a current physical problem, do not hesitate to
discuss it with your therapist and your primary care physician.
Many people with a dissociative disorder report some degree of

physical numbness and thus may not experience normal levels of
sensation and pain. They have difficulty, for example, in
determining whether bath water is too hot or cold, or they do not
notice when they have hurt themselves. They also may tend to
ignore fatigue, hunger, thirst, and other bodily needs to the
detriment of physical well-being. Thus, their bodies suffer from
neglect.
While some parts are too numb, others may be exquisitely
sensitive to the slightest of physical changes and find discomfort or
pain intolerable. It is as though they experience their bodies as
constant irritants, at best. They may become increasingly reactive
to and phobic of body sensations.
And of course, every emotion you experience is accompanied
by its own set of physical sensations, muscle tension, posture, and
tendencies to move. If you are afraid or ashamed of an emotion (or
a particular thought), you likely have also learned to avoid the
physical experiences of it as well.
In sum, you, or parts of you, may have learned over time that
physical pain could be intolerable (during abuse); you may have
associated your body with that abuse; subsequent intrusive
dissociative experiences in your body were painful or frightening;
and the physical experience of emotions (or thoughts) may have felt
overwhelming to you. For all these reasons, you have perhaps
learned to despise, fear, or be ashamed of your body, making it
difficult to take care of yourself.
Failure of Parts to Accept the Body as Their Own
In DID, some dissociative parts that experience themselves as
relatively separate from the individual may not experience the body
as belonging to them. Such parts may believe they have a different
body and may not experience bodily sensations that other parts do,
and they may even want to “get rid of” or hurt the body, as though
it is a foreign object or belongs to another person. If the individual
has a physical problem, such parts may deny that it exists because
they do not feel the body. They may even “see” their body as being
entirely different than in reality. Occasionally these parts may hurt
the body with impunity because they insist it is not theirs, or they
may engage in risky behaviors because they do not believe the
individual is affected.

Physical Self-Care May Trigger a Phobia of Inner
Experiences
Physical self-care involves at least some degree of body awareness.
People with a dissociative disorder have often learned to avoid their
bodies in order to avoid particular inner experiences such as
traumatic memories, disturbing thoughts, or painful emotions. The
image of their bodies, or awareness of sensations or movement, can
suddenly evoke traumatic memories. For example, some people
find that paying attention to their body as they try to practice
breathing exercises, or in the normal course of washing, can evoke
difficult memories, feelings, and sensations. For some, looking in
the mirror may evoke an instant feeling of shame or self-hatred.
Fear of Doctors or Physical Examination
Many people with a dissociative disorder find going to the doctor
and getting a physical exam very anxiety producing; thus, they do
not seek medical care when they need it. Some parts may be afraid
to be touched or find that being “looked at” is a trigger. They may
not trust doctors or nurses for various reasons, or they may fear
being out of control or trapped. They sometimes are afraid they are
exaggerating and will be ridiculed, or will not be taken seriously, or
will be told something is wrong and do not feel they can handle
“bad news.”
Because people with a dissociative disorder often have a lot of
physical symptoms that have no obvious cause, they may have been
told that their symptoms are “in their head,” resulting in feeling
ashamed and belittled. Actually, their physical symptoms are in
their mind and also in their body, as are all symptoms for everyone.
The mind and body are inseparable. Such individuals are not
imagining their symptoms; rather, these symptoms may be a
combination of physical intrusions from dissociative parts, and the
chronic stress response of the body, the latter of which often leads
to more serious physical problems over time.
Note: Make sure you find a competent and understanding
primary care physician. Make a list of qualities you would like to
have in a doctor and interview several to find a best fit for you. Ask
friends for recommendations. If you feel it would be helpful, you
may ask your therapist and physician to be in contact with each
other to ensure that you have an integrated health team.

Managing Alcohol, Illicit Drugs, and Prescribed
Medications
Many traumatized people tend to self-medicate with substances
because they have chronic inner chaos, depression, anxiety,
flashbacks, loneliness, or other emotional pain. They may misuse
drugs or alcohol or prescription drugs to relax, numb out, or feel
better in the short run. In some cases, particular dissociative parts
of a person will misuse substances and there may be inner conflict
about using. In a few cases, a person with DID may have little to no
awareness (amnesia) that a part is using drugs or alcohol. Self-
medication can easily lead to addiction over time.
Although this manual does not address addiction treatment, if
you are dependent on substances or are abusing them, it is of the
utmost importance to share this problem with your therapist and
make it a major focus of your current treatment. Any addiction
seriously complicates the effects of being traumatized and
interferes with treatment. If you are not sure whether you are self-
medicating or addicted, please discuss it with your therapist. Keep a
record of what you use, how much, how often, and what prompted
you to use. You can draw on the skills in this manual to help
yourself learn to handle your problems more effectively than by
using substances.
Many psychiatric medications are meant to be taken on a
regular basis, every day, unless otherwise prescribed. You should
understand what you are taking, why you are taking it, and have a
basic understanding of how it works. Perhaps you have inner
conflicts among parts about taking medication. Some parts may
believe taking medication is a sign of “weakness” or a “crutch.”
Nothing could be further from the truth. Psychiatric medications
often help your brain function more effectively, just as a heart
medication might make your heart work better if you have a cardiac
problem, or as insulin augments what your pancreas is not able to
produce if you have diabetes. Make sure you take your medication
as prescribed. Some medications (for example, antidepressants)
take days or even weeks to become effective: They cannot be taken
only during times when you feel bad. Others that act quickly and
have short-term effects should not be taken too often: These are
generally prescribed to take “as needed.” For instance, you may
have been given something for anxiety that you take only when you

feel especially anxious. Either before or when you take this type of
medication, also use your skills to calm yourself and all parts of
you. For example, talk inwardly to orient and calm parts of
yourself, listen to what parts may need, step back and reflect on
your inner experience, practice relaxation or safe space exercises,
go for a walk, or call a friend. Finally, feel free to discuss your
medications with your doctor and share inner conflicts about them
with your therapist (and your doctor, if applicable).
Regulating Your Physical Energy
Physical self-care involves regulating your energy level. Almost all
people with a dissociative disorder have some difficulty regulating
their energy. Some push themselves beyond what is reasonable, for
instance, by working too much or spending too much time doing
for others, and thus are constantly exhausted and depleted. Others
are far too inactive, which further contributes to lethargy,
depression, and disinterest in life. It is essential for you to learn to
pay attention to your body’s signals of hunger, thirst, fatigue, and
illness. Your body needs replenishment and rest on the one hand,
and activity on the other. It is essential to reach a degree of
cooperation among parts of yourself to ensure you have the proper
amount of rest and activity for your healing (see also chapters 10
and 11).
Tips for Resolving Inner Conflicts About Physical
Self-Care
• Take time to reflect on why you might be having difficulties
with physical self-care and/or body awareness and make a list
of them.
• Do not judge yourself about these conflicts; just notice them.
• Prioritize as best you can from the least to the most difficult
conflicts on your list. Begin with the least difficult and
gradually work your way through to the most difficult. As
you gain mastery with resolving the less intense conflicts,
you and all parts of yourself become more confident and
trusting with each other, and you will be more willing to take
the next steps.

• Using an inner safe space, meeting room, or by talking
inwardly, determine whether all parts of you might agree that
physical self-care might be a good thing if it was completely
safe and allowed. If so, good: You can take the next step. If
not, stop and reflect on why parts of you believe taking care
of yourself would not be helpful even if it was safe and
allowed.
• You might talk inwardly to remind all parts of you that when
you (all of you) take care of yourself, you feel better
physically, which helps you feel better emotionally. All parts
might benefit.
• Remind all parts of you that your body is safe in the present
and that body sensations are normal messages to help you
care for yourself.
• If parts of you believe you do not deserve to take care of
yourself, remind them that self-care has nothing to do with
being deserving. Those parts might prefer, for the time being,
to think of self-care as similar to maintenance of your car.
Your car needs gas to take you where you need to go; it
needs repairs to run. You cannot just neglect it. You need rest
and replenishment to do what you need to do and health
maintenance so you can continue doing what you do.
• Make sure you take time to orient all parts to the present and
reassure them that you will not get in trouble for taking care
of yourself.
• If traumatic memories or intense emotions are triggered when
you become aware of your body, help vulnerable parts to stay
in a safe place during that time (for example, when you
shower or bathe), assuring them that they will be attended to
in the near future. And continue to orient them to the present.
Be sure to keep such promises.
• Engage in inner discussions and negotiation about the ways
in which you can engage in physical self-care. If there are
conflicts, be open to hearing respectfully another point of
view and try to find common ground, that is, those self-care
activities on which all parts of you can agree.
Tips for Improving Your Physical Self-Care

• Learn to understand the messages your body gives you. Are
you able to recognize when you are tired, hungry, thirsty,
cold, hot, in pain, or ill?
• Are you able to distinguish—at least some of the time—
between a sensation or symptom that is part of a flashback
and those that are indications of present-day illness or injury?
If you have pain or other physical discomfort, you might
check inwardly to see whether any part of you might be able
to help you understand better.
• When you get up each morning, check in with yourself not
only emotionally but also physically. How do you feel in
your body? Tired? Ill? Energetic? Sore muscles? Achy
joints? Stomachache or headache? Relaxed? These physical
sensations are messages about your physical and emotional
needs.
• Practice physical relaxation every day, as noted in earlier
chapters. Develop internal agreement about these activities
and times you should practice them. Chronic physical tension
adds to mental and emotional stress, and it takes a toll on
your body.
• Exercise regularly, even if only a little.
• Make sure you are getting enough rest. Most people need 7 to
8 hours of sleep each night; some need a little more or less.
People with a dissociative disorder usually sleep much less,
but if sleeping is a problem make sure you are at least taking
short rests during the day. All parts of you need to agree that
a specific time is set aside for sleep (see chapter 9).
• If doctor or dentist appointments are difficult, try taking a
supportive person with you, talk with your doctor or dentist
about your anxiety, practice relaxation techniques, and
imagine parts of you being in a safe place during the
appointment, or perhaps sleeping through it (see chapter 8 on
inner safe places). If needed, take a prescribed antianxiety
medication before you go, if you have one. It also helps to
write down your fears, including those of other parts, and
challenge them or think about how you could help yourself
make the appointments less scary or shameful.
• Imagine caring for young parts of yourself internally, if that
is helpful to you. For example, imagine giving them a warm
bath, pampering them physically, giving them a sense of

being cared about and cared for. Or imagine that all parts of
you are experiencing the self-care you are giving yourself.
All parts need to be reminded that self-care is a part of daily
life and necessary for healing.

Homework Sheet 12.1
Physical Self-Care Questionnaire
The following questions are designed to help you learn more about
your areas of strengths and need for growth in physical self-care.
This is not a test: There is no pass or fail. Various parts of you may
have different answers to the same question. If so, note it so you
can understand and help those parts of yourself. Completing this
questionnaire will help you chose one or two target areas on which
you would like to work as a beginning to better self-care (see
Homework Sheet 12.3).
For each question, circle the number that best applies to you at the
present time:
0 Does not apply to me
1 Rarely applies to me
2 Sometimes applies to me
3 Often applies to me
4 Almost always applies
  1. I pay very little attention to my physical health.
0
1
2
3
4
  2. My physical health is poor.
0
1
2
3
4
  3. I am afraid to see a doctor.
0
1
2
3
4
  4. I do not have a primary care doctor.
0
1
2
3
4
  5. I never see a doctor even if I have serious symptoms. 0
1
2
3
4
  6. I have trouble feeling pain or cold/heat in my body.
0
1
2
3
4
  7. I am afraid to go to the dentist.
0
1
2
3
4
  8. I never see a dentist.
0
1
2
3
4
  9. I do not eat healthy meals.
0
1
2
3
4
10. I often forget to eat.
0
1
2
3
4
11. I eat at irregular times.
0
1
2
3
4
12. I am underweight.
0
1
2
3
4
13. My weight often fluctuates.
0
1
2
3
4
14. I regularly have bouts of binge eating.
0
1
2
3
4
15. I frequently vomit after eating.
0
1
2
3
4
16. I take laxatives regularly.
0
1
2
3
4

17. I am inclined to overeat.
0
1
2
3
4
18. I am overweight.
0
1
2
3
4
19. I exercise more than 2 hours a day.
0
1
2
3
4
20. I exercise regularly.
0
1
2
3
4
21. I do not get enough exercise.
0
1
2
3
4
22. I have physical problems that I am ashamed
to discuss.
0
1
2
3
4
23. I do not follow through with medical
recommendations
0
1
2
3
4
24. I am afraid to take prescribed medication.
0
1
2
3
4
25. I take medications for all my aches and pains.
0
1
2
3
4
26. I have daily aches and pains that really bother me.
0
1
2
3
4
27. People tell me I drink too much sometimes.
0
1
2
3
4
28. I drink alcohol when I feel upset.
0
1
2
3
4
29. I sometimes drink until I pass out.
0
1
2
3
4
30. I use illicit drugs socially.
0
1
2
3
4
31. I use illicit drugs when I am upset.
0
1
2
3
4
32. I do not recognize hunger or thirst.
0
1
2
3
4
33. I do not recognize when I am tired.
0
1
2
3
4
34. I have physical problems, but a doctor has told me
there is nothing wrong, or that it is “in my head.”
0
1
2
3
4
35. I do not get enough rest.
0
1
2
3
4
36. I stay busy all the time.
0
1
2
3
4
37. I do not have any energy.
0
1
2
3
4
38. I sleep too much.
0
1
2
3
4
39. I have trouble sleeping.
0
1
2
3
4
40. I cannot tell if I am really physically sick or not.
0
1
2
3
4

Homework Sheet 12.2
Making a Healthy Change in Physical Self-Care
Look over the previous questionnaire. Choose one or two target
areas on which you would like to work. Complete the section
below. Remember to take small steps toward changing your
behaviors and habits. It takes a few months for a change to become
a habit. Enlist the support of your therapist and others who can help
you.
Example
Item number (from the questionnaire): #22 I have physical problems I am
ashamed to discuss.
Describe your problems in this area: I feel ashamed to talk about my body. I
feel like I have done something wrong, if something is wrong with my body. I
hear an angry voice telling me not to say anything. Sometimes I can’t tell if I
am exaggerating a symptom or if it is real.
My objectives (what I want to do differently about the problem): To tell my
therapist about at least one physical problem so I can work with all parts of
myself to resolve fear and shame about that problem.
Inner conflicts or concerns about changing my behavior: A part of me
thinks I am weak and whining if I mention something physical. If I start
telling my doctor all the physical symptoms I have, I am afraid she will think
I am a hypochondriac.
Steps to achieve my objectives:
1. I will choose one small physical problem: pain in my back from lifting
something heavy that is keeping me awake at night.
2. I will ask internally whether all parts are aware of the pain and how
much it interrupts my sleep.
3. I will ask whether any part of myself has some suggestions to help me
take care of my back by helping me be more aware of how I am
moving and lifting things.

4. I will rest my back for 2 more days. If it is not improved, I will see the
doctor.
5. In the meantime, I will discuss with my therapist the shame and fear I
feel when something is wrong physically, as well as my reaction of
shutting down and suffering in silence.
Following the example above, complete your targeted change in
self-care.
Item number (from the questionnaire):
Describe your problem:
Your objectives (what you want to do differently about the
problem):
Inner conflicts among parts or concerns about changing your
behavior:
Steps to achieve your objectives:

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Developing Healthy Eating Habits
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Topic: Developing Healthy Eating Habits
Introduction
The Many Meanings of Food and Eating
Eating Problems in People With a Complex
Dissociative Disorder
Tips for Resolving Inner Conflicts About Healthy
Eating
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 13.1, Record of Your
Eating Patterns.
Complete Homework Sheet 13.2, A Plan for Improving
an Eating Problem.
Introduction
The focus of this chapter is to help you resolve problems with
eating related to traumatization and dissociation. Eating is an
integral part of healthy living and an often overlooked partner in
healing from trauma. Sensible and healthy eating nourishes and
helps heal your body, which is under chronic stress when you have
a dissociative disorder. When your body feels better, you feel better
in general. But if you grew up in a home in which eating was
associated with tension and stress at mealtimes, or food was not
healthy or readily available, or was used as excessive reward or
punishment, various aspects of eating may be difficult for you. We

begin with an understanding of the many meanings of food and
eating, and then discuss ways in which you might deal with any
eating problems that may be related to your dissociative disorder.
The Many Meanings of Food and Eating
Food and eating are often associated with positive thoughts and
feelings for most people. Being fed as an infant is one of the very
first ways we experience a relationship. Eating is a way we care for
ourselves and receive care from others. Thus, it is connected with
giving and receiving, with nurturing and care, that is, with people
and relationships. At social gatherings, food is often central. We
experience food in many ways: through sight, smell, taste, touch,
and even sound (the sizzle and pop of some dishes), so that
awareness of foods can affect all of our senses. Certain foods also
evoke emotions because they have become associated with
particular memories.
Eating is also a necessity, providing us with the energy and
nutrients we need for living. Poor eating habits can cause both
physical and psychological symptoms. Eating too little can lead to
becoming seriously underweight, vitamin and mineral deficiencies,
brittle bones, dental problems, anemia, poor memory, and
difficulties in thinking clearly and rationally. Overeating can result
in obesity, an increased risk of heart disease, diabetes, asthma, joint
and bone problems, and even of certain types of cancer. In addition
to physical symptoms, eating problems can give rise to numerous
psychological symptoms, such as shame and self-loathing,
depression and anxiety, a disturbed body image, and a tendency to
isolate from others.
Attention to and knowledge about healthy eating habits differ
from person to person, family to family, and culture to culture. If
you need basic nutritional guidance, cooking skills, help with
efficient food shopping, or tips for healthy meal planning, there are
many Web sites and books readily available on those subjects. If
you need more personalized guidance, we suggest that you consult
a nutritionist, whom your therapist or primary care physician can
help you locate.
Eating Problems in People With a Complex

Dissociative Disorder
A majority of people with dissociative disorders have at least some
difficulties with eating (for example, Boon & Draijer, 1993;
Goodwin & Attias, 1993; Vanderlinden & Vandereycken, 1997).
Different parts of yourself may have different eating preferences or
problems, resulting in unstable or chaotic eating patterns. Some
parts of you may have reasons to avoid food as much as possible,
while others may have a tendency to overeat or binge.
If you are not yet very aware of dissociative parts of yourself, it
may be difficult for you to understand certain eating problems that
occur due to the activity of these parts. For example, perhaps you
find evidence that you have been eating during the night without
awareness, or find food in the kitchen that you do not like but must
have bought, or feel intense urges to binge or purge, or limit your
food unreasonably. You may have food preferences or craving that
suddenly begin and end without warning. It may be uncomfortable
or perhaps even frightening to realize that other parts of you have
actually bought, prepared, or eaten food outside of your awareness.
But as you become more comfortable with parts of yourself, you
will feel less afraid and more able to negotiate and coordinate the
essential activity of eating.
Following is a list of eating problems that are often experienced
by people who have a dissociative disorder. Check or circle the
ones that may apply to you or to other parts of yourself.
• Bingeing (eating excessive amounts of food in one sitting,
beyond what is healthy, to the point of feeling bloated and
sick)
• Purging (forced vomiting, use of diuretics or laxatives to get
rid of food and decrease weight)
• Food restriction (eating too little or a very limited variety of
food compared to what the average person consumes)
• Being triggered by particular foods or by eating in general,
and associating food with negative feelings and beliefs, or
memories
• Lack of knowledge about basic nutrition
• Difficulties shopping for food
• Difficulties making food choices
• Difficulties with food preparation (for example, it feels too

complicated or overwhelming to make a meal)
• Sudden loss of knowledge about how to prepare food or
sudden lack of familiarity about how to use kitchen
appliances
• Problems establishing healthy and regular eating routines
• Forgetting to eat due to problems with time management
and/or inattention
• Inability to feel hunger or thirst due to physical numbness
and avoidance of physical sensations
• Desire to maintain a body shape that is not within a healthy
range because it feels protective (for example, being
overweight helps you feel insulated; being underweight helps
you feel less like an object of desire, or it gives you the
certainty that you cannot get pregnant)
• Conflicts among parts of yourself about whether, what, and
when to eat
• Food and eating are associated with shame and self-loathing
• Difficulty being around others when eating
• “Emotional” eating, that is, using food to cope with emotions
• Food restriction or withholding as punishment
Tips for Resolving Inner Conflicts About Healthy
Eating
• Learn to recognize and understand your difficulties with food
and eating. Reflect on any inner conflicts about aspects of
eating (for example, regarding shopping, staying within
budget, preparation, types of food). Make a short list of any
problems and check the ones with which you want to begin.
Remember to begin with easier problems before you work on
more complex ones.
• Recognize that some parts of yourself may be stuck in
trauma-time and may have found solutions in the past to
regulate intense emotions through their eating habits (under-
or overeating), and other parts may be triggered by certain
foods or mealtimes. Begin by acknowledging the purpose and
intention of these eating problems, rather than blaming parts
of yourself.
• Eating problems, like many other problems, can take time to

resolve. Be patient and empathic with all parts of yourself.
Allow yourself to be content with taking small steps at a
time.
• Begin by choosing one small problem area about food and
eating, for instance, shopping, or cooking, or irregular meal
times. These are tasks that are usually accomplished by you
or other parts that have a function in daily life. Make a list of
small and very specific steps you need to put into action.
Spend time communicating internally to get a sense of how
various parts of yourself should be involved with a plan.
• If some part of you is triggered by food to the degree that it
makes you unable to eat, help this part of yourself be in an
inner safe place during food preparation and mealtimes as a
temporary containment. Later, when you are ready, you can
help this part overcome what is triggering.
• You might spend a little time considering what foods you
appreciate and enjoy, and whether there are different
preferences among parts of yourself. If helpful, use a diary or
your computer to create a file where all parts may list their
food preferences. You can learn to take into account wishes
of other parts in a reasonable way, instead of ignoring or
criticizing them.
• Notice what happens when you think about your eating
problem, for example, shopping or eating irregularly. Of
what beliefs are you aware? What emotions and sensations?
Are you aware of any parts of yourself that might have a
different experience with eating than you do? Be
compassionate with yourself as you become more aware.
• Make every effort to eat at least three times a day in order to
get into a healthy routine. Reach an inner agreement with
other parts to do so. Make a plan to remind yourself to eat by
using a timer or alarm, if you need it. Set some dates to go
out with friends to eat. Put a list of meals on the refrigerator
and cross them off when you have eaten.
• If you have a daily inner struggle about cooking, or if you
have little time for cooking due to work or other obligations,
make large portions of food at a time, divide them into
individual servings, and freeze them or store them in the
refrigerator, so that you will have something healthy to pull
out and eat quickly when you do not feel like cooking or do

not have time.
• If particular parts of you have strong food preferences or
aversions, try to allow some flexibility in responding to them.
Perhaps you can temporarily avoid a food if it is triggering to
a part of you. Or you might provide a food preference in
moderation for a part of you.
• It is important to set healthy limits on the food that various
parts want to eat. It will not help you to give in to a part that
only wants to eat ice cream or cookies, for example. After all,
your job is to begin to provide yourself (including all parts)
with a healthy lifestyle.
• Eating patterns often have an underlying emotional goal: You
may eat when you are tired, bored, angry, depressed, and so
forth. When you feel hungry, yet do not need to eat, notice
what emotions or thoughts you are having. Are there any
feelings or situations that you might want to avoid by eating?
Also pay attention to whether a part of you needs something,
such as comfort or attention from you.
• When you have eaten well, and some part of you still feels
the need to eat, determine whether this part is oriented to the
present. If not, try to orient this part to the present so that you
can share your physical sensations of being satiated. You
may also imagine an inner safe space where food is plentiful
for parts of you that may feel chronically deprived.
• Binge eating is usually a way of regulating unbearable
feelings. If you suffer from (nocturnal) attacks of binge
eating (with amnesia), inner communication and cooperation
with parts can help stop this behavior. For example, perhaps
parts will agree that nighttime is only for sleeping (see
chapter 9 on sleep), and not for eating. A safe inner place
with plentiful food may be sufficient to stop parts of you
from actually eating during the night. With the help of your
therapist you can begin to understand more about the parts of
yourself that engage in such behaviors and then try to help
them make positive changes, which may include finding
suitable alternatives that meet their needs adequately.
• Try to make more social contacts that involve eating. If you
have problems with regular meals, make an agreement with
friends or colleagues that each person will cook a large meal
to share with everyone each week (for instance, a big pot of

soup, stew, pasta, chili, etc.), so you do not have to cook as
often. This activity and sharing also helps you become more
accustomed to socializing while eating.
• If you or parts of you find it hard to eat, pair your eating with
something enjoyable about which all parts can agree, for
instance, taking a picnic to eat on a pleasant hike; sitting
outdoors and enjoying the breeze while you eat; arranging
your food nicely on the plate and adding a special garnish;
setting the table nicely and adding flowers, candles, and
music; and so forth.
• If there is a day that you really cannot eat, use liquid
nutritional supplements.
• If you have serious eating problems, be honest with your
doctor, dietician, and therapist and let them help you make a
stepwise plan that works for you.

Homework Sheet 13.1
Record of Your Eating Patterns
1. List healthy eating habits you and parts of yourself already
employ and wish to continue.
2. In the chart below, list your successes and challenges in eating.
Successes might include eating at a regular time, eating healthy
food, preparing a meal. Challenges might include forgetting to eat,
refusing to eat, bingeing, eating junk food, or difficulty in shopping
or preparing a meal. Use this chart to keep track of your eating.

Homework Sheet 13.2
A Plan for Improving an Eating Problem
Based on the example below, list one eating problem, your
objectives for what you want to change, any inner conflicts among
parts of yourself, and specific steps to help yourself. Objectives
should always be measurable, defined, specific, and include simple
steps.
Example
Eating Problem
Describe Your Problem
Eating unhealthy food Eat a lot of junk and fast food; not enough
vegetables; too many sodas; hate to cook
Eating at irregular
times
Forget to eat; eat on the run; snack all day; find
evidence that I am eating during the night
My objectives (what I want to do differently):
Eat a healthy meal (including fresh fruits and vegetables or salad) at least
once a day at a regular time: lunch (between noon–1 p.m.) or dinner (between
6:30 p.m.–7:30 p.m.)
Inner conflicts or concerns about changing my behavior:
1. Parts of me like junk food, and it’s a comfort for them and
me.
Possible solution: Buy one type of junk food and have it, but in
limited quantities; that is, eat one serving portion. Chew your food
slowly and mindfully, and savor it; this will make you feel more
full and satisfied. Be mindful that you have given yourself a treat.
2. I don’t like change and I am afraid of additional inner
struggles.
Possible solution: I will try to communicate (maybe with help of
my therapist) with parts of myself so I can understand more about
the fear of change. I will find and discuss with all parts of myself.
I will start small, changing one thing at a time. I will introduce
one healthy food at a time, and I will begin with one regular meal
that includes some healthy food.
Steps to achieve my objectives:

1. Take time for inner communication, cooperation, negotiation, and
joint decision making about each step of my plan.
2. Gain a better understanding of what foods are and are not healthy.
3. Set specific times to eat each day and set an alarm as a reminder.
4. Choose a couple of healthy and easy recipes or find places where I can
buy prepared healthy food that is within my budget.
5. Make a list before going to the grocery store; take into account
different preferences of all parts of myself.
6. Ask a friend to shop with me, so I will stick to my list.
7. Go to grocery store only once a week.
Eating problem (describe your problem in detail):
My objectives (what I want to do differently; be specific):
Inner conflicts or concerns about changing my behavior:
Steps to achieve my objectives (begin with small, manageable
changes; be specific).

PART THREE
SKILLS REVIEW
You have learned a number of skills in this section of the manual.
Below you will find a review of those skills and an opportunity to
develop them further. As you review, we encourage you to return to
the chapters to read them again and repractice the homework a little
at a time. Remember that regular, daily practice is essential to learn
new skills.
For each skill set below, answer the following questions:
1. In what situation(s) did you practice this skill?
2. How did this skill help you?
3. What, if any, difficulties have you had in practicing this
skill?
4. What additional help or resources might you need to feel
more successful in mastering this skill?
Chapter 9, Developing a Bedtime Routine; Developing and Using
a “Sleep Kit”
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 10, Developing a Realistic and Healthy Daily Structure
and Routine
1.

2.
3.
4.
Chapter 11, Relaxation Exercises (The Tree, The Healing Pool,
and Muscle Relaxation)
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 11, Developing a Relaxation Kit
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 12, Making a Healthy Change in Physical Self-Care
1.
2.

3.
4.
Chapter 13, A Plan for Improving an Eating Problem
1.
2.
3.
4.

PART FOUR
Coping With Trauma-Related
Triggers and Memories

CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Understanding Traumatic Memories
and Triggers
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: Understanding Traumatic Memories and Triggers
Introduction
Autobiographical Memory and Traumatic Memory
Understanding Triggers
Recognizing Triggers
Types of Triggers
Triggers for Positive Experiences
• The Store: An Exercise for Support, Strength, and
Protection
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Practice The Store exercise.
Use the Learning to be Present exercise from chapter 1
as needed.
Complete Homework Sheet 14.1, Identifying Triggers.
Complete Homework Sheet 14.2, Reflecting on
Reactions to Triggers.
Complete Homework Sheet 14.3, Identifying Positive
Triggers.
Introduction
The instability experienced by people with a complex dissociative

disorder is often related to the reliving of past traumatizing events,
also known as flashbacks or reactivated traumatic memories (Boon,
2003; Van der Hart et al., 1992). In this chapter you will learn
more about traumatic memories and how they are different from
everyday, normal memories; why they are so overwhelming; and
how they are related to dissociative parts of yourself. Traumatic
memories are often evoked or triggered by a stimulus (trigger) in
the present that is a reminder of some aspect of the original
traumatizing event. You will learn more about triggers and how to
recognize them. In the next chapter, you will then learn how to
reduce and cope with triggers.
Autobiographical Memory and Traumatic Memory
Generally people are able to recall important events they have
experienced in the past. They realize the event has happened to
them and that it is not happening now. The memory is, so to speak,
a part of their “autobiography.” But as you may painfully
experience at times, this is not the case with traumatic memories.
When you, or a dissociative part of you, reexperiences a traumatic
memory, you feel as though it (or at least some aspect of it) is
happening in the present.
Traumatic memories may include intense or overwhelming
feelings, such as panic, rage, shame, loss, guilt, despair; conflicting
beliefs and thoughts; physical sensations such as pain; visual
images, sounds, and smells; and also behaviors, such as running
away, fighting, freezing, or shutting down. Each of these aspects of
a traumatic memory can occur simultaneously, in succession, or
separately at different times. Typically, these reactions are not
appropriate to the current situation, or they are far more intense
than the situation warrants. You may want to return to chapter 4 for
a review of traumatic memories (flashbacks).
Understanding Triggers
A trigger (or reactivating stimulus) is something that bears a literal
or symbolic similarity to an aspect of an unresolved traumatic
experience. It may be a present-day situation, an interaction with
another person, an object, or even an inner experience such as a
particular feeling or sensation, a smell, or a position of your body.

Parts of you then may automatically react in similar ways as during
the original traumatizing situation, that is, parts of you have
conditioned reactions that you cannot consciously control.
Being able to accept traumatic experiences as your own is not
easy, and it may take some time and work before you are ready.
This manual is meant to offer you opportunities to learn and
practice the skills you need to be able to achieve the task of fully
realizing what has happened to you. In the meantime, you may find
that you continue to have problems from time to time with being
triggered, because some dissociative parts of yourself remain stuck
in trauma-time and thus are vulnerable to reliving past experiences.
Therefore, it will be helpful for you to be able to recognize triggers
and your reactions to them in order to change these conditioned
responses.
Recognizing Triggers
It may be hard to recognize when you are triggered unless you have
an extreme reaction. But it does help to recognize some
possibilities that you might be triggered:
• Your reaction to a situation seems more intense than is
warranted, or it is significantly different than your usual
reactions.
• You are not able to step back and reflect in the situation, but
feel stuck in your reaction.
• Inner parts of you become activated to the degree that you are
aware of them.
• You have a defense reaction, that is, flight, fight, freeze, or
collapse.
• You seem to watch your reaction unfold, not feeling in
control of it, as though another part of you is having the
reaction.
• You switch to another part of yourself and lose time.
• You have a sudden flashback; these are almost always
triggered by something in the present.
Sometimes you may be able to recognize the link between a
trigger and the original traumatizing event. For example, a person
might be aware that the smell of gasoline evokes fear and panic

because of a traumatic past experience involving gasoline.
However, at other times, you may not be aware of what has
triggered you. Perhaps you have no memory of the event and thus
cannot make a connection with a trigger. Or even if you know
about it, you may not be (very) aware of the part of yourself that
has become triggered, or you may simply not understand the link
between them. As we have noted, the parts of you that function in
daily life are adept at avoiding parts stuck in trauma-time, as well
as the traumatic memories that they hold, so you may find yourself
not wanting to know why you are triggered. Unfortunately, this
avoidance has serious disadvantages. When you cannot understand
and accept your inner experiences, they become confusing and
frightening, seemingly arbitrary and out of control. This only
increases your fear of inner experiences and you then make your
life ever smaller to avoid dealing with yourself (see chapter 5 on
the phobia of inner experience). Therefore, you need to learn to
reflect on triggers and the reactions they evoke in you and other
parts of yourself.
Although it may sometimes seem as though “all of life” is a
trigger, it can be of great help to distinguish specific triggers. Then
you can notice that not all situations are equally disturbing to you
and that you have already learned to cope successfully with certain
triggers.
You may be puzzled by the fact that you can be triggered at one
time by a stimulus, but not at another time. Your vulnerability to
triggers is determined to a large degree by your physical and mental
condition in the moment. If you are more tired or spacey, sick or
seriously stressed, or faced with new challenges or problems that
seem overwhelming, you are more likely to be triggered. If parts of
you are in inner chaos and conflict, you are very prone to becoming
triggered more easily. And as you work on particular aspects of
your history, the triggers related to that time may be more active for
a while.
Triggers can involve an infinite variety of experiences or
objects, depending on what has become associated with a particular
traumatic episode. Although it is important to recognize triggers,
you do not necessarily need to know at this point in time the history
related to the trigger in order to cope differently. In the early stages
of treatment you may not yet be ready to deal with painful
memories to which they are related.

For example, if you feel panic in crowded stores, regardless of
whether you know why, you can begin to help yourself with
practical solutions. Perhaps you might choose to shop during times
when stores are less crowded. You might make a list before you go,
so that you minimize time in the store. You can help parts of you
remain in an inner safe place while you shop. You might take your
partner or a friend with you. We will discuss strategies such as
these to cope with triggers in the following chapter, but your first
task is to be able to recognize that you have become triggered and
to notice your conditioned reactions, that is, your thoughts,
feelings, impulses, sensations, movements, and so forth. To that
end, we describe various types of triggers, which may help you
become more aware of your own.
Types of Triggers
Following you will find an explanation of different types of
triggers.
Time-related triggers. You may have heard of “anniversary
reactions,” in which a person has a predictable and involuntary
reaction on or around the anniversary of a traumatizing event. This
experience is most well known in people who have intense grief
reactions each year around the anniversary of the loss of a loved
one. But anniversary reactions may be evoked for a wide variety of
other events. At first, you may not recognize an anniversary
reaction, but you or your therapist may begin to notice that you, for
instance, become depressed, or very anxious, or feel suicidal
around the same time each year, time after time.
Time-related triggers may also involve a time of day or a
particular period of time, such as weekends or holidays (see also
chapter 16). For example, some traumatized people may become
increasingly fearful and anxious as it becomes dark each evening,
related to overwhelming experiences that may have occurred
around that time.
Place-related triggers. Many people find it hard to return to
places where they were abused or had other highly distressing
experiences. This avoidance can generalize to other places that
remind them of the original situation, prompting them to evade
more places and experiences to prevent triggering. For example, if
a person had been robbed or assaulted on a bus, he or she might be

inclined to avoid all busses. And eventually, this person may come
to avoid any public transportation, including trains, trams, and
planes.
Many traumatized people regularly report that they are upset or
overwhelmed by crowded spaces, such as shopping malls, long
checkout lines, or crowded waiting rooms. Their aversion often has
nothing to do with a traumatic memory, but rather they feel
overstimulated and trapped, which may be similar to inner
experiences they felt during traumatic events in the past.
Even though some parts may be triggered by certain places,
other parts may not be; they may even enjoy, for example, riding in
the train or flying, or being at the mall. These contradictory
experiences may set up internal conflicts, because some parts may
dismiss or even be unaware that a trigger is problematic for other
parts.
Relational triggers. Relationships themselves are often triggers.
Relationships and any perceived threat to them evoke the most
powerful feelings in everyone, for better or worse. When you have
been mistreated by others, intense feelings of abandonment,
rejection, humiliation, shame, panic, yearning, and rage are often
easily triggered by the minor ups and downs that are a natural part
of even the best of relationships. And when a serious relational
disruption occurs, it can feel catastrophic. Some parts of you may
always be on guard, looking out for any cues that perhaps you are
being rejected or criticized, and thus they may overlook important
cues to the contrary. Others may desperately seek out relationships,
not attending to whether they are healthy (see chapters 28 and 29
for more about relationships).
Many patients with complex dissociative disorders rightly felt
criticized, lonely, and misunderstood as children. Anger or critical
remarks by a partner or a friend in the present may quickly give rise
to a partial reliving of old experiences, such as intense fear of being
abandoned or misunderstood, or fear that you cannot speak your
mind without terrible consequences.
Internal triggers. People who have a dissociative disorder have
typically learned to avoid much of their inner experience in order to
avoid traumatic memories (see chapter 5). Any inner experience
may be triggering, such as the sound of another part talking or
yelling, certain emotions (anxiety, anger or shame, and so forth),
sensations (such as pain, sweating), needs (such as wanting to be

comforted), or thoughts (such as “I wish I was dead” or “I am not
happy in this relationship”).
Some parts may even provoke other parts as an internal
reenactment of old experiences. For example, a highly critical part
might scream that you are stupid when you are trying your best to
cope with a difficult problem at work. This inner experience may
be quite similar to some you may have had as a child. We will
further discuss ways to deal with this type of internal triggering
from dissociative parts of yourself in chapter 22 on anger, and
chapter 24 on shame and guilt.
Sensory triggers. Body sensations are a particular type of
internal trigger. These may resemble similar sensations that
occurred around the time of a traumatizing event. Smells are
particularly potent triggers. Other sensations include pain, the
racing heart and breathlessness of anxiety, feeling too hot or cold,
nausea, thirst, hunger, stomachache, the need to eliminate, or even
certain body postures. Some women may be triggered by the
sensations that accompany menstruation. The sense of being
touched by another person may be especially triggering from some
individuals.
Triggers for Positive Experiences
Triggers are usually thought of as negative, but some triggers evoke
positive feelings and memories. For example, looking at pictures of
a nice holiday that you enjoyed, the smell or taste of a specific
food, or particular music may all evoke positive memories and
feelings of contentment or warmth. Positive triggers are important
because they can help you find some enjoyment and calmness in
the present. In fact, your personal anchors are positive triggers that
help you stay in the present.
THE STORE:
AN EXERCISE FOR SUPPORT, STRENGTH, AND
PROTECTION
This imagery exercise is intended to help you cope with triggers by girding
yourself with resources that can help when you feel overwhelmed. Practice
this exercise often, or a similar one that fits better for you, when you are
feeling calm. Once you are familiar with the exercise, you can begin using it

when you feel stressed.
Imagine a store in which anything you want or need as a
resource for healing can be found and taken for free. This is no
ordinary store, with ordinary aisles and ordinary merchandise.
This is a magical place, a special place, beautiful and
comfortable. Perhaps you see it as a quaint village shop, or an
old bookstore with comfortable chairs and steaming pots of tea,
or a sleek high-tech store with all the latest gadgets, where
espresso and lattes are available as you browse. You can
envision it in just the right way for you. It is your store that you
create. In your shop you feel completely at ease, wandering up
and down the familiar aisles, where the lighting and
temperature are just right, where all is well and just as it should
be. Perhaps it is quiet, or perhaps your favorite music is playing
in the background. Perhaps there is even a little stage where
your favorite musicians are performing just for you. This is one
store where you really enjoy lingering, choosing just the right
items for your strength and protection. And indeed, there is an
endless selection: shields; screens; transparent bubbles; magic
stones; books of great wisdom; vials of liquid with healing
properties; protective spirit or animal guides; magic cloaks of
many colors, and some invisible to all but you; form-fitting,
lightweight suits of armor; emotional Kevlar, and on and on.
Each is an equally strong and effective protection from the
slings and arrows of life, from the vulnerability of being
triggered. You may choose as many as you like, and exchange
them as you wish. And as you wander around, or sit
comfortably in a chair, allow all parts of you to have their time in
this store, because it is for all of you.
Just to practice, try out one of the special protective suits or
cloaks. Just as a raincoat or waterproof suit keeps the water out
and allows it to slide off of you, or just as a windbreaker
protects you against icy winds, so you can imagine that you
have found just the right suit of protection for yourself in your
store. And allow each part of yourself that wishes or needs to
have their own suits, each suit just right for each part of you.
You will be amazed at how flexible and lightweight, yet sturdy
and comfortable it is. You can don it in an instant, so quickly
that no one notices. You can take it with you wherever you go,
and wear it whenever you like. Your suit or cloak is just the right
weight, the right material, the right texture and color to help you
feel completely protected from head to toe, front to back, up
and down, all around, where not a single chink or crack or hole
will allow negative forces to gain entry, and where you are

comfortably ensconced in safety and calm. You are completely
protected in body, mind, and heart. You are protected from
other people’s emotion that set you on edge, from triggers that
might evoke you, from the stresses and strains of life and living.
If you wear the suit even when you feel more tranquil and
secure, it offers you extra protection, adding even more
serenity, calm, and safety.
Now allow a situation to come to mind, one in which you felt
uneasy or insecure. Imagine wearing your suit or cloak and
walking into that situation with a sense of deep protection,
confidence, relaxation. It is as though you cannot be touched by
the situation, unaffected by the stress of it, yet still you feel very
present because you feel safe and protected. Take your time to
imagine yourself in the situation with this protective suit. And be
aware that at any moment, you may make adjustments to your
suit or return it to your store and find another. When you are
ready, you can return to your store. Look around once again,
taking all the time that you need to be familiar with every aspect
of it. This is your store. You can return whenever you need or
want. It is there for each part of you whenever it is needed. And
when you are ready you can return to the present, feeling
strong and serene, supported and safe.

Homework Sheet 14.1
Identifying Triggers
Choose a time when you were recently triggered. Reflect back on
the situation and answer the questions below, as you are able. This
reflection will help you become more aware of yourself and what
evokes you and other parts of you. If this exercise evokes too much
for you, simply stop and practice a grounding or relaxation
exercise. It is essential to pace yourself. Discuss with your therapist
how you might be able to learn more about triggers without
becoming overwhelmed.
1. Where were you and what were you doing when you were
triggered?
2. Describe the trigger, if you know.
3. What was your inner experience of being triggered (for example,
feeling like you were out of body, anxiety or panic, visual or
auditory flashbacks, nausea, loss of time)?
4. If you lost time, what is the last thing you can recall (for
example, a sound, smell, image, thought, feeling)?
5. Are you aware of any specific parts that may be involved? If so,
please describe what you understand about that part of yourself.
6. If you were with someone, what, if anything, might have been
stirred up for you in the relationship (for example, you felt hurt,
angry, invisible?)
7. Note the date, season, and time of day when you were triggered,
if you have a sense that the trigger may be time related.

Homework Sheet 14.2
Reflecting on Reactions to Triggers
In the chart below, choose a time each day this week when you
have been triggered (if you have). Do not focus on any traumatic
memories at this point, but only your reactions to them. As you
reflect on the experience, answer the questions below as best you
are able. If you are not being triggered, that is wonderful! You may
then use this chart to describe previous examples of being
triggered.

Homework Sheet 14.3
Identifying Positive Triggers
Make a list of positive triggers and what they evoke for you. Use
these experiences in your daily life to help you feel better and more
grounded.
Examples
1. Positive trigger: snowfall
Reaction: a feeling of pleasant excitement and fun memories of
playing in the snow
2. Positive trigger: the smell of freshly baked bread
Reaction: a feeling of comfort, of having pleasant and basic things in
life
3. Positive trigger: a funny joke or movie
Reaction: laughter, feeling grounded, a feeling of being lighter for a
time
1. Positive trigger:
Reaction:
2. Positive trigger:
Reaction:
3. Positive trigger:
Reaction:

CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Coping With Triggers
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: Coping With Triggers
Introduction
Reducing or Eliminating Triggers in Daily Life
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 15.1, Identifying Triggers
and Coping Strategies.
Complete Homework Sheet 15.2, Skills to Cope With
Triggers.
Introduction
In the previous chapter you learned about triggers, and that parts of
you stuck in trauma-time are most vulnerable to being triggered,
unable to distinguish between the past and present. You may not
always be completely aware of these parts. The more you can
reflect on your inner world, the more effective you can be in
helping all parts of yourself cope with triggers. But of course,
managing triggers is difficult. The first steps are usually the
hardest. Do not expect yourself to completely control all your
triggers immediately. And some triggers are easier to manage than
others. Any person can be triggered by completely unexpected
situations. Just take your time and learn to be more reflective and
tolerant of your experiences.
In this chapter we focus on specific ways to deal with triggers

effectively.
Reducing or Eliminating Triggers in Daily Life
Regardless of whether you are ready to directly cope with your
traumatic memories, you must still deal with being triggered in
ways that interfere with your daily life. In the following sections we
describe specific methods to cope with triggers.
Eliminating or Avoiding Triggers
When you become more aware of your triggers, you may
temporarily eliminate or avoid certain objects or situations, and
thus become triggered less often. This should be a temporary
measure only, until you are able to resolve what is being triggered.
Otherwise you will feel the need to restrict your experiences more
and more. But once you are triggered less often, you can begin to
work on your skills and resources so you can overcome what is
upsetting you. Temporarily stow away, give away, or throw away
objects in your home that trigger you, for example, photographs,
art, a particular blanket, a knick-knack, a book. It is important to
remind yourself and other parts of you that a particular object or
situation does not have to overwhelm you the rest of your life. You
and other parts can learn to be less reactive in the present as you
begin to feel safer and calmer. It might be helpful to remind all
parts of you that the object or situation is reminiscent or
representative of something painful from your past, but it is not
dangerous itself.
When you are not able to eliminate a trigger, you might
temporarily avoid it. For instance, if you are triggered by seeing
someone drunk, avoid places where such people are likely to be
found (parties, bars, pubs, weekend nights in the city). If a part of
you is terrified of crowded areas, you can choose to shop at times
when stores are likely to be less crowded, while you are working
with that part to overcome the fear of crowds. If a part of you is
afraid of the dark but you want to see a movie, you can choose to
watch a DVD at home instead of going to the theatre. Again, these
are only meant to be temporary solutions, until such time that you
can approach and handle the cause of being triggered more
adaptively. You can also have empathy for these parts of you
instead of being angry or frustrated with them, and assure them you

are taking their needs into account as well as helping them
gradually overcome their fears or concerns.
Anticipating Triggers
If you anticipate that you might be triggered by a certain situation
that cannot be avoided, you can plan ahead to cope with it
effectively. For example, perhaps you need to make an appointment
to receive a flu shot, but some part of you is terrified of shots. You
may find the crowded waiting room intolerable, and feel exposed
and vulnerable when visiting a doctor. Nevertheless, you need your
influenza shot for your health, so this is not a situation to be
avoided.
You can prepare yourself by reflecting with all parts of you to
discover what you need to cope. You can calm and reassure parts
inside that you are getting medication that keeps you healthy: You,
as an adult, will make sure nothing bad will happen. You might
take time before the appointment to help parts of you go to an inner
safe place, or you might imagine allowing them to stay at home,
and only adult parts that can distinguish the past from the present of
yourself should go to the appointment. Some people may have
inner helper parts that can calm and reassure, but it is doubly
effective if you can join with these helpful parts in reassuring all
parts of you. You can use your own imagination to help vulnerable
parts in this way until they are able to heal.
Above all, do not ignore parts of you that are triggered by
acting “tough” and belittling these parts of yourself. You run a far
greater risk of losing control or switching than when you anticipate
what you need.
In addition to inner preparation, you might also ask for the
support of others when you are faced with a situation that triggers
you. In the aforementioned example, you might ask someone to go
with you to the doctor—someone who will keep talking with you to
help you stay present. You can ask to make your appointment the
beginning or end of the day, or immediately after lunch, so you can
be in and out without spending too much time sitting in the waiting
room.
Imaginal Rehearsal
All too often, when people imagine an upcoming situation, they
imagine themselves failing or being overwhelmed. That is, they

imagine a negative outcome. Imaginal rehearsal is the opposite:
You imagine yourself being completely successful, walking
through the situation step by step (Bandler & Grinder, 1975). Many
people find it helpful to imagine successfully negotiating through a
challenging situation ahead of time. You may begin by imagining
that you are watching yourself. For example, imagine watching
yourself walk into the doctor’s office feeling calm and adult-like.
Imagine being able to reassure yourself if you begin to feel anxious.
Imagine being wrapped in your protective suit or your favorite
colors, and not even feeling the injection. Imagine that all parts of
you feel perfectly safe in the present. Imagine having all the
support you need. Imagine supportive people being with you,
encouraging you, cheering you on. After you have successfully
“watched” this scenario, imagine it from your own perspective.
Imaginal rehearsal is more successful when you share its purpose
with all parts of you, and as many parts as possible can participate.
Recognizing Options
Often when people are triggered, they feel trapped and helpless.
Recognizing that you have options is essential to feeling more
control and choice. You might be surprised at the choices you do
not realize that you have. And you are only limited by your own
creativity! For example, continuing with the example of the flu
shot, if you become too triggered, give yourself the option of
leaving if parts of you become too afraid. Or give yourself the
option of walking outside to calm down or allowing the nurse to
help you calm down. Give yourself the option to either watch or
avert your gaze when you get the shot: whichever helps you more.
Give yourself the option of being assertive and asking the nurse or
doctor to tell you every step of the procedure ahead of time, so you
will know what to expect and can be a part of deciding how and
when the injection is given.
Neutralizing the Effects of Triggers
You can learn to create distance from the emotional and physical
experience of being triggered. Usually this method involves
imaginal techniques that you have already learned in this manual.
For example, you can use an inner safe place in which parts of you
can be protected from the overwhelming experiences of being
triggered. Parts of you may voluntarily go to sleep in their safe

place if you anticipate a time when you may be triggered, so that
only adult parts aware of the present need cope with the situation.
You can use The Store exercise in chapter 14 and imagine having
on a special suit or cloak, or a shield that triggers cannot penetrate.
Or try The Tree or The Healing Pool exercises from chapter 11 to
immediately calm all parts of yourself if you become triggered. In
chapter 18 you will find suggestions for putting your feelings in a
container such as a bank vault or a computer file.
Distinguishing the Past From the Present
It is essential for all parts of you to learn to distinguish between
here and now and then and there. For example, a particular knife or
fork from the kitchen or the color of the living room wall in the
present may remind you of a painful experience in the past, but it is
not the same knife or fork or the same living room. Of course,
before you can make a distinction between the past and present,
you must be aware that you are in the here and now. Continue using
your various anchors to the present from chapters 1 and 2. The
more quickly you can ground yourself, the easier it will be to cope
with triggers. You may also find it helpful to carry a small object,
such as a beautiful small stone, as a tangible reminder of being in
the safe present. As soon as you touch it, you can immediately feel
yourself become more present.
Once you are present, you will find it helpful to describe the
differences between an experience in the past and present in detail,
to actually say it out loud to yourself, and to keep reminding all
parts of these differences. For example:
The green color on the wall is the same as in the past, but the wall,
the room, the house, the city, the year, and even I am not the same
as in the past. The only similarity is green, only paint. I am not
there, I am here. I can see the pictures on the wall that are different
than in the past. The carpet on the floor is different. When I look
out the window, I see the scenery of the present, which is different
from the past. This green wall reminded me of something that I am
not yet ready to handle. I will put that memory in a safe place and
contain it until I am ready.
This repetition gradually helps all parts to notice these
differences, instead of only focusing on what is similar to the past.

It is particularly important to pay attention to differences when
a person in the present reminds you of someone from the past with
whom you felt uncomfortable or unsafe. For example, if a friend
becomes irritated with you in the present, you or other parts of
yourself might automatically react with fear because an angry
person was dangerous in the past. However, you notice that your
friend’s voice is not raised, and he is not screaming or cursing. He
is speaking to you respectfully, and you know his intentions toward
you are good in general. His body language shows no indication
that he might be physically violent. These are cues that tell you this
interaction is different from the past. Draw the attention of all parts
of you to these cues and bring them back again and again to these
cues in the present. In this way all parts of you can learn that
although an aspect of the present might be similar to the past
(irritation or anger), many other aspects are different enough that
you can learn when it is safe. You are teaching parts of yourself the
early beginnings of reflection about the motivations and intentions
of others in the present.
It is also helpful to notice what is different about you, that is,
you are an adult, not a child. You are stronger, have more wisdom
and experience, and have supports and resources that you did not
have as a child.
Inner Orientation, Cooperation, and Support
You have begun to experience times of being able to orient parts of
you to the present, help parts cooperate for your well-being as a
whole person, and share mutual inner support. These skills are
essential in helping you overcome the effects of triggers. When
inner parts feel more trusting of each other to attend to, care for,
and respect one another, they will feel calmer and less afraid and
chaotic. When they are helped to become more oriented to the
present, they can reflect more on their inner experiences. And when
parts can cooperate, for example, to help other parts remain in an
inner safe place without disturbance or to avoid situations in which
you may be triggered, all parts of you will feel better. Some degree
of inner cooperation is already present when you talk inwardly to
all parts of yourself, when you remind them of the safe present,
when you create inner safe places, when you practice relaxation
exercises, and when all parts of you pay attention not only to what
is similar to the past, but more important, to what is different.

This inner cooperation and support can grow exponentially over
time, as you will see. People with a dissociative disorder often
know at some level, or in some part of themselves, which situations
are best avoided or how a triggering situation might best be
handled. Inner dialogue and reflection among parts about the best
approach to situations is helpful, and it must go beyond merely
telling all parts to “just do it.” You are a team and must work as a
team. Be compassionate with yourself and all parts inside; and help
them to engage cooperatively with you as often as you are able. Of
course, we are aware that inner cooperation, communication, and
support take time to develop and are not always easy to achieve. It
may not always seem clear or obvious how you can accomplish
these skills. Be patient with yourself and all parts of yourself. In
chapter 27 we will return to the subject of inner cooperation, as
well as to more advanced work on distinguishing between the past
and the present.

Homework Sheet 15.1
Identifying Triggers and Coping Strategies
As in your homework from the last chapter, choose a time when
you were recently triggered and reflect back on the situation and
answer the questions below, as you are able. This reflection will
help you again practice identifying triggers but also to become
aware of what coping strategies you might already use. If this
exercise evokes too much for you, simply stop and practice a
grounding or relaxation exercise.
1. Where were you, and what were you doing?
2. Describe what triggered you, if you know.
3. What was your inner experience of being triggered (for example,
feeling like you were out of body, anxiety or panic, visual or
auditory flashbacks, nausea, loss of time)?
4. If you lost time, what is the last thing you can recall (for
example, a sound, smell, image, thought, or feeling)?
5. If you are aware of specific parts of yourself that were triggered,
describe their experience as best you can.
6. If you were with someone, what, if anything, might have been
stirred up for you in the relationship (for example, you felt hurt,
angry, invisible?)
7. Describe what you did to cope with being triggered at the time,
and what you did afterwards. You may have used some of the
coping skills discussed in this chapter or others. You may even
have coped in ways that were not healthy. Do not judge yourself;
simply describe what you did.

Homework Sheet 15.2
Skills to Cope With Triggers
Choose a time when you were recently triggered and reflect back
on the situation and answer the questions below, as you are able.
This reflection will help you become more aware of how you might
employ some of the skills you have read about in this chapter. If
this exercise evokes too much for you, simply stop and practice a
grounding or relaxation. Refer back to the chapter as needed. You
will be using one or more of the following skills:
• Eliminating or avoiding triggers
• Anticipating triggers
• Imaginal rehearsal
• Recognizing options
• Neutralizing triggers
• Distinguishing the past from the present
• Inner orientation, cooperation, and support
1. Describe an object or situation in the present that triggered you
recently.
2. Describe the reactions of you, or other parts of you, to the trigger
(for example, feeling like you were out of body, anxiety or panic,
visual or auditory flashbacks, nausea, loss of time; being frozen or
collapsed).
3. If this trigger can be eliminated or avoided, describe how you
could accomplish that for the future (for example, avoiding violent
movies, putting away a photograph or book; deciding not to visit a
particular place).
4. If you were to anticipate this trigger in the future, how might you
prepare for it? For example, helping parts be in an inner safe place,
using images of protection, or practicing imaginal rehearsal.

5. Describe in retrospect any options you had but did not realize
that you had at the time you were triggered (for example, you could
have left the situation, called a friend for support, oriented parts of
yourself to the present, or calmed and reassured them, but you did
not think of it).
6. Practice protective imagery (for example, from The Store
exercise) and containment strategies for the feelings, sensations,
and memories that are evoked when you are triggered.
7. Describe the differences between the trigger in the past and its
present-day context, for example, the bed is similar, but the room is
different; the beard on a man is similar to the past, but it is not the
same man.
8. Describe any inner orientation, communication, cooperation, and
support you were able to accomplish when you were triggered. If
you were not able, describe what stopped you and how you might
support your inner parts in the future.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Planning for Difficult Times
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Topic: Planning for Difficult Times
Introduction
Planning Issues for People With a Complex
Dissociative Disorder
Difficult Holidays and Other Special Times
How to Plan for a Difficult Time
Reflections to Help With Planning for Difficult Times
Tips for Effective Planning
When Obligations to Others Conflict With Your Needs
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 16.1, Preparing for a
Difficult Time.
Introduction
People with a complex dissociative disorder often have specific
periods of difficulty with depression, anxiety, fear, shame,
posttraumatic stress, or other problematic symptoms. Many of these
difficult times can be predicted based on how people have reacted
in the past to similar situations. These times might include
weekends, extended time alone, holidays, times when contact is
necessary with people who were abusive in the past, or painful
anniversaries of past events (which often are not recognized as
such). Planning is always needed for times in which you are likely
to encounter an unusual amount of triggers. When you are able to

predict that you might have a hard time, you can plan ahead to deal
with the situation effectively, instead of being blindsided by it.
These important coping skills of forward thinking and planning, the
ability to “deal with it before it happens,” are essential in daily life
and also vital in learning to help dissociative parts of yourself. This
chapter will help you learn to plan for difficult times so they are a
little easier to manage.
Planning Issues for People With a Complex
Dissociative Disorder
Planning ahead may be difficult and can be an enormous challenge
for individuals with a dissociative disorder, especially when it
involves the need for self-care and boundary setting. Such people,
or at least some parts of them, generally avoid dealing with painful
or conflicted feelings and situations. As a consequence, they often
avoid thinking about or planning ahead to help themselves better
manage a potentially difficult time. In the following sections you
will find some of the major reasons why planning is difficult when
it involves conflicted dissociative parts of yourself. You may also
have your own unique reasons that are not listed.
General Feeling of Being Overwhelmed in the Present
When people are already overwhelmed and depleted, thinking
about the future can seem like a monumental task, much less
planning for it. Thus, it is essential to do your best to care for
yourself, manage your time, get sufficient rest, and use your
relaxation skills.
Inner Chaos and Confusion
Cognitive confusion and fogginess, blankness, and inner chaos
among parts can make it difficult to think through and plan. Often
this is due to being overwhelmed in the present and/or conflicts
among dissociative parts.
Inner Conflicts Without Sufficient Capacity for Negotiation
Various dissociative parts may have conflicting needs or desires
about an upcoming time. These conflicts may make the time more
difficult than it needs to be. People may not be aware of these parts,
or they may ignore or belittle them. For example, while one part

may enjoy a free weekend, another may find it a waste of time, and
yet another may find it lonely and overwhelming. One may dread a
holiday while another comments on how ridiculous it is to dread
just another day. It can take time to learn how to be more aware of
inner conflicts among parts and how to negotiate satisfactory
outcomes. You can begin by acknowledging the conflicts and
taking them seriously, and trying to help those parts of yourself as
best you can. Gradually, negotiation will become easier.
Difficulties With Time, Time Management, and Time Loss
Most people with a complex dissociative disorder have some
difficulties with time (see chapter 10; Van der Hart & Steele,
1997). Some are forgetful and may not recall making an
appointment, or they may engage in the same activity twice, not
remembering they have already done it. Some may be so
overwhelmed or depressed that they sit and do nothing or sleep
away the day, unable to focus either on the present or the future.
Some people with DID report recurrent problems with double
bookings of appointments made by different parts of themselves or
cancellations of appointments by other parts.
Difficulties Setting Priorities
Some people find it hard to prioritize what is most important, and
for people with a dissociative disorder this may involve inner
conflicts among various parts about what is important (for instance,
feeling safe is a priority that may conflict with being in a particular
relationship, which is a different priority).
Problems With Executive Functioning
Executive functions are cognitive skills involved in our ability to
organize thoughts and activities, prioritize tasks, manage time
efficiently, and make decisions. These skills may be limited or
lacking in some traumatized people because traumatic stress
adversely affects the areas of the brain that are key to using these
functions. These problems can be overcome to a large degree, and
there are many readily available resources on the Web or in print
for coping with problems with executive skills, particularly in
material that addresses attention-deficit disorders in adults.
Difficult Holidays and Other Special Times

Specific times of day, time of year, seasons, holidays, weekends,
and anniversary dates of significance may trigger painful feelings
or traumatic memories (see chapters 14 and 15 on triggers). In
addition, free days and times such as weekends, evenings, holidays,
and vacations may be hard because they lack sufficient structure for
people who do not yet know how to manage their free time (see
chapter 11 on relaxation and free time). During such days people
may have more time to feel and think about painful issues or
memories, which they might prefer to avoid. And if they are
avoiding dealing with inner parts, these times are fertile ground for
such parts to emerge unbidden. Therefore, empathic internal
communication and collaborative planning are invaluable to
prepare for these times.
Next we discuss holidays as one example of a stressful time for
which it is helpful to plan in advance.
Managing Holidays
Holidays are painful for many people, not just those who have a
dissociative disorder. Some degree of depression, anxiety,
loneliness, hurt, and general stress are fairly common for people in
general. Everyone knows about the “holiday blues,” and at some
level most of us realize that expectations of ideal holidays rarely
match reality. Yet even when people may realize their expectations
are unrealistic, they still may be affected emotionally. And there are
added complexities for people who must make difficult decisions to
be with family who might have been abusive in the past or continue
to be abusive in the present; furthermore, some people are faced
with the prospect of being alone at an important time. Finally, there
may be pressure from those around you, or parts within you, to act
like everything is fine, when you feel anything but fine. Such
demands compound feelings of loneliness and being
misunderstood, and even of shame or despair.
Many people with a dissociative disorder did not have positive
experiences of holidays in childhood, and these memories may be
triggered, resulting in anxiety, depression, inner conflict and chaos,
and flashbacks. Inner reflection, including communication with
dissociative parts of yourself, may help you identify triggers and
help you make plans to cope with them. You might decide to
consciously avoid the trigger for the time being or help parts of
yourself cope differently. For example, you might decide to use

different holiday decorations, if the usual ones remind you of
painful times. Or you might notice the similarities and differences
between here and now and then and there, for example, the holiday
is the same, but what happens during the holiday now is quite
different from then, and you are an adult now. The problem is not
the holiday (the trigger) itself, but what it represents for you. You
might plan to find ways to contain painful memories so you can
enjoy the present holiday, and then deal with these memories at a
later time, for instance, storing them in an imagined vault, or box,
or on a computer file. It is often helpful to plan how you want to
spend a holiday instead of waiting to find out what friends and
family will do and whether they will invite you to join them. Learn
to be proactive and deal with it before it happens!
Times of Day, Anniversaries, and Seasons
Many people with a dissociative disorder struggle during other
kinds of situations that are reminders of painful events in the past.
Perhaps nights are hard because that is when they were hurt by
someone or when they feel the most lonely. Sometimes the date of
an overwhelming experience brings back all the pain. For others, a
season may be difficult, for example, summer brings up painful
reminders of events that occurred during that time of the year or,
conversely, may evoke a sad yearning for wonderful summers spent
with loving grandparents when life at home was hard.
Other Difficult Times
There are many times in daily life that may be especially stressful,
such as a big meeting at work, an ongoing conflict with someone, a
visit to the doctor, a medical or dental procedure, a separation or
divorce, being alone when you need the support of others, or
having to meet with family members whom you find difficult or
even unsafe, and many others. Some of these situations may be
challenging in their own right, while others are difficult because
they trigger you or some parts of you. We have addressed many of
these issues in other chapters, for example, dealing with doctors in
chapter 13 on self-care, coping with triggers in chapters 15 and 16,
and regulating overwhelming emotions in chapters 17 and 18.
Coping With Being Alone During Difficult Times
There may be important times when you wish to be with others but

instead find yourself alone. This happens from time to time for
almost all people. Perhaps it is a weekend or holiday, your birthday,
or a difficult anniversary for you. The loneliness that is evoked can
be profound and painful.
Make efforts to plan for these times. Even though you are alone,
you do not have to feel lonely. Use your relaxation kit (chapter 11)
and plan healthy activities to occupy yourself. Make a list of
activities that you or some parts of you would like to do with and
without other people. Try choosing a couple of activities that are
agreeable to your whole self. If you cannot be with someone during
your difficult time, plan to get together with someone a little later.
You can always celebrate holidays or birthdays on a different day if
you are flexible. After all, it is the enjoyment of the day, not the
date itself that is important. If you are alone during a holiday or
other important time, volunteer somewhere or make other active
plans instead of sitting at home doing nothing and feeling lonely.
You will find more help in dealing with being alone and lonely in
chapter 30.
Regardless of the type of situation, if you think you might have
a hard time, the planning process is similar, with certain predictable
steps, which we discuss next.
How to Plan for a Difficult Time
If you know of an upcoming time that will likely be difficult for
you in some way, begin early with inner reflection and
communication among parts of yourself. Reflect on what happens
for you during those times, noticing what you feel and think, how
your body responds to the stress (for instance, freezing or agitated),
and how various parts of you react. The awareness you gain from
reflection allows you to make different choices instead of feeling
hopelessly captive in your experience.
For example, if you are aware a part of you always criticizes
you during these times, you might be able to communicate more
with this part of yourself to understand why. Perhaps this part
believes you will fail and criticizes you in the hopes that you will
try harder, or perhaps it uses anger to avoid shame or fear about the
situation. If you know you always freeze, you might be able to
begin to notice and to change that physical reaction instead of being
stuck in it. If you can be aware that you are feeling hopeless, you

might be able to provide yourself with comfort, meaningful contact
with others, and inner support for parts of yourself.
You may dialogue with parts of yourself, write in a journal or
on the computer, or imagine an inner meeting. If you find these
tasks difficult, ask your therapist to help you. Do not wait until the
day before to communicate internally about upcoming difficult
times. Give yourself sufficient space to think it through, to reflect,
and to make a plan that will help you, so you can “deal with it
before it happens.” Even if you do not have “direct”
communication with parts, you may already be aware of certain
activities, people, foods, and so forth that might trigger you, as well
as some ways to help yourself be more comfortable and safe.
In the next section you will find some questions that will help
you reflect on how you, including all parts of you, can best plan for
difficult times. Find a quiet time at home to reflect on these
questions. Try to take into account thoughts and ideas from as
many parts as possible, because various parts of you may perceive
the situation differently from each other.
Reflections to Help With Planning for Difficult Times
• What times tend to be your most difficult?
• When you have a difficult time, what happens? For example,
what do you feel and think, how does your body react?
• How do you usually make a plan? For instance, do you think
it through, avoid it, prefer to be completely spontaneous, talk
about it with others?
• What obstacles do you encounter while planning? For
instance, beginning a plan, identifying the steps needed to
complete a plan, getting lost in too many choices or details,
inner criticism or conflicts among parts, trouble completing a
plan.
• What techniques and skills do you already use to help
yourself with planning? You may also check on the Internet,
look for books on planning (and executive functioning), or
ask for help from your therapist or other supportive people.
• What has helped you in the past with difficult times?
• List any triggers for which you know you need to prepare
yourself.

• What are the fears and concerns of various parts of yourself
about a particular time?
• How might you ensure your emotional and physical safety
during this time?
• What obligations might you have to others during this time?
Do these obligations conflict with your own self-care?
• Are there relational limits or boundaries that you need to set?
If so, what would help you set them?
• Are particular parts of yourself especially vulnerable during
this time? If so, what do they need to feel safe, supported,
and cared about by you?
• Notice whether you prefer activities with other people during
difficult times or if being alone is more helpful.
Tips for Effective Planning
• Put your plan in perspective. The need to plan is usually not
an emergency, so you do not have to do it urgently. Give
yourself time to think and to check in with yourself.
• Try to let go of the belief that there is only one single “right”
solution or choice. There are almost always many “right”
pathways, and if you make a mistake, you can deal with it.
Many plans involve a combination of pros and cons, so often
there is not a “perfect” solution, but rather one which likely
requires some compromises.
• Most importantly, include all parts of yourself in your
planning. Attend to their concerns, needs, and desires without
judgment.
• Listen to both your head and your heart, that is, reflect.
Sometimes your logic and your emotions (or “gut”) tell you
something entirely different. Various dissociative parts
typically base a choice either on too much feeling or on
avoidance of feelings and needs, and they often do not know
enough about the present. If all parts of you can work
together to learn more about the present, acknowledge
feelings, needs, and wants, and offer inner empathy and
support, making plans can be a lot easier and clearer.
• Think before you act. Take your time, even if you feel
“urgent.” Imagine being in your safe space or use a relaxation

exercise to get yourself in an alert, calm space. Let all parts
of yourself know they will be acknowledged and considered
as you make your plans.
• Imagine how your plan will affect you and parts of yourself.
You are learning how to take care of yourself, which means
you need to take yourself into consideration, as well as
others. This is not selfish, but rather good self-care. After you
anticipate how the plan will affect you and other parts of
yourself, then you can take others into consideration.
• Ask trusted others for feedback, but make your own plans,
taking their advice into consideration.
• Be willing to modify your plans if they are not working.
Making small changes along the way often helps you
accomplish your final plan better than rigidly sticking to a
plan.
When Obligations to Others Conflict With Your
Needs
You may find yourself in conflict during a difficult time between
your own needs and those of others. For example, you may have an
obligation to attend a family function that you know will be very
stressful for you. You prefer not to go, but you must. This may
provoke intense inner conflicts among parts inside. Next you will
find some suggestions for dealing with these conflicts in such a
way that you are able to take care of yourself. You must learn to set
healthy boundaries and negotiate compromises that work for you
and all parts of you (see chapters 30 and 31 on assertiveness and
personal boundaries).
• Negotiate to limit visits with others who are difficult, for
example, visit for an hour instead of an entire evening, or a
day instead of a weekend. Announce your time limit in
advance or at the beginning of the visit. If needed, set the
alarm on your watch or phone for the right time so you will
not forget, or have a trusted person call you at that time.
• Stay in a hotel rather than in the home of a person with whom
you have a difficult time.
• Invite a friend to be with you for support.
• Make plans to leave early if needed.

• Have your own transportation so you do not have to rely on
someone else.
• Use imaginary rehearsal, protective suits, and inner safe
places.
• Make quiet times for yourself during difficult visits by taking
walks, going to your room to read or rest, or going to a movie
or other activity.
• Make time for inner reflection and check-ins with all parts of
you. Treat their needs seriously and with compassion.

Homework Sheet 16.1
Preparing for a Difficult Time
Choose a difficult time that you predict is likely to occur (not your
most difficult, but one that you feel ready to tackle). Record your
reflections below regarding this difficult time (you may refer back
to the reflections to help you plan). If possible, allow parts of you
to participate without making any judgments about them. Try to
develop a plan to address your difficult time. It is OK to start with
very small steps. If you were able to try the plan after you made it,
describe what happened. If you were not able to try the plan (or
come up with a plan), please describe what made it difficult.
1. Describe the difficult time on which you have chosen to work in
this exercise.
2. Describe what you are most concerned about during this time
(for example, having flashbacks, being overwhelmed, being afraid,
freezing and going blank).
3. If you are aware of any parts of yourself that are particularly
vulnerable during this time, describe what might happen for them
(for example, a part may want to engage in self-harm or may feel
suicidal; it may want to be with someone who is hurtful to you; or it
may be terrified, ashamed, or become enraged).
4. Begin your planning by finding a quiet time, free of distraction
and chaos. Use some of the relaxation exercises in chapter 11 to
help you be calm and clear headed. Also use your inner safe
place(s) to help all parts of you feel safe and secure. It is essential
to stay focused on the present, not on the imagined catastrophic
future.
5. Next, check in with all parts of yourself to survey your needs and
desires for this time and describe them below. It is fine if various

parts have conflicts: Do not judge them or worry about the conflict,
but rather simply write down what each part of you wants or needs
during the difficult time. For example, one part may want to self-
harm, while another part wants to hide; yet another part may want
to explode in anger, while another part wants to be extra good so
that she might be loved by someone.
6. You may be able to find some common ground among parts in
these conflicts you have shared in #5 above. For example, if a part
wants to self-harm, you likely are feeling overwhelmed with some
emotion, and the self-injury may be a way to reduce the sense of
being overwhelmed. And certainly all parts could agree that being
less overwhelmed might be a common goal each of you could work
toward. Likewise, if one part is terrified and another part is furious
about this “cry baby,” it is possible that both parts need and want
safety. The one is expressing fear, while the other is acting “tough”
to protect vulnerability: Both are simply different ways to respond
to threat. And all parts might agree that feeling safe is a worthy
common goal.
Describe one or two inner conflicts (if you have any) about your
difficult time, using the examples above as a guide. After you
describe the conflict, see if you can determine the underlying
common goal among parts. If you need help, make sure you take
time in therapy to understand these conflicts and any possible
underlying common goals.
7. Describe your plan for being emotionally and physically safe
during your difficult time, using inner consultation and, if needed,
help from trusted others.
8. Describe the resources you or parts of you may need to cope with
your difficult time. For example, parts may need to feel safe or
comforted, may need to remain in an inner safe place, may need to
know the adult part of you is capable of dealing with the situation,
or that a safe person is available to talk, if needed.
9. Finally, describe what you will do if you become overwhelmed.

For example, you can leave, take a time-out and go for a walk, call
a friend, take time to go to an inner safe space, practice relaxation
exercises, or take prescribed medication to calm you.

PART FOUR
SKILLS REVIEW
You have learned a number of skills in this section of the manual.
Below you will find a review of those skills and an opportunity to
develop them further. As you review, we encourage you to return to
the chapters to read them again and repractice the homework a little
at a time. Remember that regular, daily practice is essential to learn
new skills.
For each skill set below, answer the following questions:
1. In what situation(s) did you practice this skill?
2. How did this skill help you?
3. What, if any, difficulties have you had in practicing this
skill?
4. What additional help or resources might you need to feel
more successful in mastering this skill?
Chapter 14, The Store Exercise
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 15, Identifying and Coping With Triggers
1.
2.

3.
4.
Chapter 16, Strategies for Effective Planning for Difficult Times
1.
2.
3.
4.

PART FIVE
Understanding Emotions and
Cognitions

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Understanding Emotions
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Topic: Understanding Emotions
Introduction
Basic Emotions and Their Functions
Problems With Emotions for People With a Complex
Dissociative Disorder
• Mindfulness exercise
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Practice the Mindfulness exercise at home.
Complete Homework Sheet 17.1, Identifying and
Understanding Emotions.
Complete Homework Sheet 17.2, Sensory Experience
of an Emotion.
Introduction
Emotions are part of our basic functioning as humans. They are
present in everyone, and they are there to guide us and help us
make decisions. Emotions are felt in the body; they involve somatic
sensations, specific postures or movements, and tendencies toward
certain actions. They are also understood as signals to behave in
certain ways during particular circumstances. Generally emotions
are not voluntary, that is, you cannot “make” yourself feel a
particular emotion. They are a bit like internal weather, coming and
going, changing from time to time, flowing from one to the other,
sometimes stormy, sometimes calm. This internal weather is as

normal and expected as outside weather. And like weather,
emotions are influenced by various environmental stimuli, either
internal or external effects. Emotions are spontaneous (involuntary)
reactions to events outside and inside ourselves. They are primary
guides that help us best adapt our behavior to what is happening in
the present. For example, love helps us be closer to someone we
care about; fear helps us avoid a dangerous situation; joy helps us
seek out pleasant experiences.
Because emotions are basic to our functioning, it is essential to
understand and learn to “read” them. The first step is being able to
name and recognize basic emotions, and then to understand their
functions and how to respond to them.
Basic Emotions and Their Functions
There are many lists of basic emotions. We have chosen to describe
eight that are based on our evolution from animal emotions and are
found universally in people around the world. These emotions are
paired in a range from mild to intense.
1. Interest–Excitement
2. Enjoyment–Joy
3. Surprise–Startle
4. Distress–Anguish
5. Anger–Rage
6. Fear–Terror
7. Shame–Humiliation
8. Disgust
Judging Emotions
Although we often tend to view emotions as good or bad, this is not
a helpful judgment. Emotions are neither good nor bad; they simply
are part of our functioning as humans. It is true that we recognize
some emotions as pleasant and others as unpleasant or painful, but
you will find it very useful to focus more on the purposes and
meanings of an emotion rather than judging them. This is a step
toward accepting them as part of you and part of life.
Emotions Help Us Meet Our Needs
One major function of emotion is to motivate and initiate behavior

that is directed toward specific goals, that is, behavior that can meet
our needs. For example, anger directs us to fight when we are
provoked, hopefully keeping us safe; fear prompts us to run away
or avoid something that is frightening or threatening; love directs us
to behave in ways that draw us closer to the ones we love, because
we need safe relationships.
Emotions are not really separate “things”; they are part of
bundled experiences that include not only emotions, sensations,
thoughts, and physical actions but also our perceptions of what is
happening in the present and our predictions of what will happen if
we act in a certain way. Emotions are as essential as thinking and
behaving to our survival. However, when the ability to regulate and
tolerate emotions is disrupted or inadequate, this entire bundled
experience becomes difficult to manage.
Two Kinds of Emotional Experiences
Some feelings or emotions are involuntary reactions to events that
happen around you (for example, feeling joy because someone is
especially nice to you; anger because someone criticizes you or
forgets a date you made; fear because something startles you).
Other emotions are primarily a reaction to your own thoughts,
actions, and feelings (for instance, being ashamed of your body
because an inner voice tells you that you are ugly; feeling
embarrassed that you feel sad; feeling guilty or afraid because you
are mad with someone). These “feelings about feelings,” that is,
emotions about our inner experience, particularly those that involve
variations of shame or pride, are called self-conscious emotions
(Tracy, Robins, & Tangney, 2007). They can often be problematic,
because they are paired with inner negative judgments about what
we experience.
Feedback Loops of Perceptions, Thoughts, Feelings, and
Behaviors
As noted earlier, our emotions are intimately connected with our
thoughts, behaviors, sensations, and the ways in which we perceive
the world. These experiences are not actually separate, but rather
bundled together, in continuous feedback loops with each other.
For example, when people feel afraid, they will tend to view the
world through the lens of fear, perceiving many things as
threatening, when daily life may not be dangerous in reality. These

perceptions are related to fear-related thoughts and beliefs, for
example, “That man is frowning; he must be angry with me; anger
is dangerous; I must get away.” These thoughts and beliefs
heighten the perception of danger, which heighten the feelings of
fear, which heightens thoughts of danger, and so on. And
perceptions, emotions, and thoughts induce decisions to act in
certain ways. Eventually, people may become so sensitively
conditioned to an emotion such as fear that merely having a
physical sensation of fear, such as a sinking feeling in the stomach,
may prompt them to believe danger is near and to act in a fearful
way.
Problems With Emotions for People With a Complex
Dissociative Disorder
People with a complex dissociative disorder were often confronted
as children with situations that evoked extreme and overwhelming
emotions. Generally young children learn from their caregivers
how to understand and regulate emotions. People with a
dissociative disorder often grew up in families in which it was not
acceptable to show or discuss certain emotions. In some cases, it
was actually dangerous to express feelings, resulting in punishment,
ridicule, or complete disregard. Parents or caregivers of people with
a complex dissociative disorder typically had a problem with
emotions themselves and were thus unable to teach their children
adaptive and healthy skills to deal with emotions. These children
learn to avoid or disregard their own feelings. They also have
difficulty reflecting, that is, accurately reading other people’s
emotions and intentions in the present, generally assuming
something negative rather than positive.
Intense Emotions Are Often Dissociated
People with a dissociative disorder have compartmentalized,
intolerable, intense emotions in various parts of their personality.
Sometimes parts that function in daily life do not experience much
emotion and have learned to avoid feeling much. They may
experience feelings as “all or nothing,” that is, far too intense or not
at all. Some dissociative parts of the personality, living in trauma-
time, may experience the same emotion no matter the situation,
such as fear, rage, shame, sadness, yearning, and even some

positive ones just as joy. Other parts have a broader range of
feelings. Because emotions are often held in certain parts of the
personality, different parts can have highly contradictory
perceptions, emotions, and reactions to the same situation. As an
example, you may be in your therapist’s office and hear a door
slam in the hallway. You jump and are startled, but the adult part of
you is able to think, “It’s OK. It’s just a door closing.” Yet a very
frightened part of you becomes more and more upset and freezes or
wants to run out of the room, because that part is not yet oriented to
the present and still feels in great danger as though the past were
the present. Intense fear continues to be dissociated in that part of
you, while you may not feel it at all. You, or other parts of you,
may be highly critical of the scared part of yourself.
You may become so fearful or ashamed of so many emotions,
as well as the physical sensations that are a natural part of
emotions, that you have learned to avoid (some of) your inner
experience at all costs (see chapter 5 on the phobia of inner
experience).
Negative Judgments of Emotions Among Dissociative Parts
Dissociative parts of an individual often make negative emotional
judgments about each other. For example, one part may feel
disgusted because another part feels needy or dependent; or one
part feels angry because another part is afraid to try new things.
Some parts avoid feeling anything at all and believe emotions are a
waste of time. Some people hear these comments in their head or
“sense” them in the background. These “feelings about feelings”
are often highly problematic, because they generally include harsh,
negative judgments about basic emotions, which, in fact, are merely
an inevitable part of being human.
Fear of Losing Control
The major parts of you that function in daily life may have little
idea of why a given feeling occurs, almost as though it comes “out
of the blue.” Thus, people with a dissociative disorder may
experience anxiety or fear of losing control of their behavior or
feelings to other parts of themselves. In addition, emotions can be
experienced as so overwhelming that some people describe it as
“falling apart,” “exploding,” “crumbling,” or other metaphors for
intense loss of control.

Difficulty Attending to Emotional Signals in the Present
We all must attend to the signals that emotions give us. Otherwise
the emotion is likely to intensify or evolve into something else even
more difficult to manage. Many people find it easy to ignore their
feelings. But an ignored minor feeling may escalate to an intense
one, for example, irritation at someone who is bothering you may
build to outright anger if you do not address it. You might then
explode in anger with your friend or partner, and the other person
will have no idea why, because you never said anything about
being irritated. If you had been able to attend to the signal of
irritation, you may have been able to speak up respectfully, set
good boundaries, and never come to the point of anger.
Most people with a dissociative disorder have not learned to
read their emotional signals, only recognizing that they feel
globally overwhelmed, or awful, or bad, or tense. They are not yet
able to distinguish the physical and mental signals associated with
specific emotions, and how they might differ from the signals of
other emotions. They must first learn to read and interpret their
emotional signals and match them to particular emotions. Reading
emotions may be complicated by the fact that some parts have an
emotion, while others may not experience it. The part that does not
experience the emotion may only be aware of a vague unease or
restlessness. This is one reason why it is vital to develop more
internal awareness about your emotions and dissociative parts of
yourself.
Triggers May Evoke Overwhelming Emotions
As we noted earlier in the chapters on triggers, they may
instantaneously evoke powerful and overwhelming emotions.
Various dissociative parts tend to have their own particular set of
emotions related to traumatizing events, and thus they will be
triggered to experience those emotions, without regard to the
present situation. In fact, such parts often do not even experience
much of the present. Thus, while one part oriented more in the
present may be feeling fine, another part that is stuck in the past
might be quite fearful or angry. The emotions of dissociative parts
can intrude into present experience so that a person begins to feel
fear, anger, or shame that is not related to the here and now. These
feelings, stemming from dissociative parts, can be confusing and
frightening, leading the person to try to avoid emotions, as well as

situations in which these emotions are reactivated.
MINDFULNESS EXERCISE
Emotions can best be understood and dealt with when you are fully
engaged in the present moment and able to attend to your inner
experience while staying in the here and now. The following
exercise is designed to help you practice being present and mindful.
It will be most helpful if all parts of you can participate; otherwise
your attention is divided rather than concentrated on the present.
You will need a small piece of food that you enjoy, such as a
raisin or other piece of fruit, a piece of candy or cookie, cheese or
nuts, or a slice of vegetable.
Take the food and put it in the palm of your hand or
between your finger and thumb. Look at it carefully. Give it your
full attention and examine it as though you have never seen
anything like it before. Roll it gently between your thumb and
forefinger. Explore it with your fingers. Look carefully at the
parts that might catch the light, and at all the little grooves and
ridges or irregularities. Explore every single nook and cranny of
it.
And if, while you are doing this exercise, thoughts enter
your mind such as “This is stupid!” or “What on earth is the use
of this exercise?” or if other thoughts about another topic come,
simply acknowledge them and redirect your attention back to
your food. Now smell it, holding it right under your nose, and
with each breath you take, notice the smell. Slowly move it
towards your mouth. You may feel your mouth beginning to
water. Put it in your mouth and notice what your mouth feels
like, with the food in it. Let it lie on your tongue a little. Then bite
down on it deliberately, noticing the taste that is released. Chew
on it slowly, notice whether more saliva enters your mouth, and
whether the food gradually begins to feel different in your
mouth. Chew slowly, savoring each bite. When you are ready to
swallow your food, be aware of it going down your throat and
into your stomach. Notice that in your mouth the last remnants
of the taste of the food may still linger.
Each day this week, practice eating something with complete
attention: a piece of cheese, an apple, a piece of candy. Practice
with a food that you like.
You can expand this exercise to include other routine actions,

such as brushing your teeth, shopping, driving, getting dressed, and
so forth. The point is to be completely focused on the present
experience, even when there does not seem to be any important
meaning to it. Such exercises are meant to help you learn to be
present and attentive to yourself and your environment in the
moment, a necessary skill for reflecting and keeping yourself
grounded.

Homework Sheet 17.1
Identifying and Understanding Emotions
1. Make sure you can identify in yourself or in others the eight
basic emotions listed in the beginning of the chapter. Name one or
two emotions below with which you feel comfortable.
2. Name one or two emotions that you never or very rarely
experience, or of which you are afraid or ashamed.
3. Describe an impulsive urge to act (do something) that you might
experience when you are faced with a difficult emotion. For
example, when you feel lonely, you feel the need to make the
feeling go away by any means possible, even though you know that
the behavior is not good for you in the long run, such as drinking,
self-harm, (binge) eating.
4. List one or two healthy ways of coping with the feeling you
described in #3 above, even if you have not been able to use them
yet.
5. Name any emotions you might judge as “bad” in yourself or
others and state why you think they are negative.
6. Do you find that pleasant feelings such as happiness, pride, fun,
or joy are negative for you? If so, describe what is negative for you
about those feelings.
7. Name any emotions that some parts of you might experience and
other parts do not. Describe your reaction to those emotions.
Describe the reactions of other parts of you to those emotions.

8. Please describe as best you can what you are concerned about or
fear if you experience a certain emotion that you now avoid.

Homework Sheet 17.2
Sensory Experience of an Emotion
Choose one emotion and describe how you experience it in as much
detail as possible. Feel free to use metaphors, images, and
descriptions of sensory experiences. Use the suggestions below as a
guide. There are no right or wrong ways to describe your emotion.
• Sensations that accompany emotion: tingly, tense, warm,
cold, shivery, sweaty, dizzy, burning
• Colors, such as ice-blue, red-hot, sunny yellow, dreary grey,
pitch-black
• Sensations such as bitter, sweet, sour, rough, soft, hard,
smooth
• Shapes such as round, square, twisty, ball, triangle, rope, blob
• Metaphors such as “like a storm”; “like a big black hole in
my chest”; “like a tornado”
• Creative arts: painting, drawing, doodling, mandalas, collages
• Writing: keep a journal about your feelings or write a story or
poetry
• Music: make a collection of music that expresses your
emotion
• Movement: explore finding a particular posture or movement
that symbolizes your emotion
As you reflect on the sensory experiences above, explore how you
might be able to change them to feel better. For example, if you
experience an emotion as a hard black ball in the pit of your
stomach, ask yourself what the ball wants to do or what it needs.
Does it want to be thrown? To change color? Does it want warmth?
To be held in your hands? To dissolve into light? Does it have
something to say? Does it want to uncurl and stretch out? Does it
prompt a movement in your body, a change in posture? Be creative
and trust yourself, and get help if you feel stuck in your
exploration. Also make sure you are staying within what is
tolerable as you explore. If you have trouble doing so, stop and ask
for help from your therapist.

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
The Window of Tolerance:
Learning to Regulate Yourself
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: The Window of Tolerance: Learning to Regulate
Yourself
Introduction
The Window of Tolerance for Arousal
Experiencing Too Much: Hyperarousal
Tips for Coping With Experiencing Too Much
Experiencing Too Little: Hypoarousal
Tips for Coping With Experiencing Too Little
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 18.1, Learning About Your
Window of Tolerance.
Complete Homework Sheet 18.2, Your Tips for
Coping With Feeling Too Much or Too Little.
Introduction
As we noted in the previous chapter, emotion regulation is an
essential part of healing. However, many people with a dissociative
disorder tend to experience too much or too little in many different
areas of life, not only with emotions. They may feel every little
ache and pain or change in their body (too much), or they may not
feel pain when injured or feel physically numb all over (too little).

They may seek out experiences that may be risky (thrill seeking) or
avoid new life experiences altogether. They may overthink and be
unable to turn off their thoughts, while others may be unable to
think much at all and feel blank. Some are highly sensitive to
changes in their surroundings, noticing every little thing such that it
becomes hard to concentrate, while others are very inattentive to
their surroundings. And of course, dissociative parts intrude into
the present with unregulated experiences, contributing to feeling
too much or too little.
Feeling too much and too little are actually two sides of the
same coin: Both indicate difficulties with regulation of
physiological arousal. Your arousal level simply indicates how
physically and emotionally responsive or even reactive you, or
certain parts of you, are to certain stimuli. In particular, you may
become dysregulated when you react to stimuli that are especially
emotional or stressful for you, such as learning a difficult new skill,
having an argument with your partner or friend, driving in traffic,
having an unpleasant feeling, or remembering something painful. In
order to function at our best, we all need an optimal arousal level—
not too high and not too low, depending on the level needed for the
current circumstance. In this chapter you will begin to learn how to
regulate or modulate your arousal to manageable levels.
The Window of Tolerance for Arousal
A major goal in therapy is to support you, and all parts of yourself,
to learn how to experience “enough,” rather than too much or too
little. This range of optimal arousal is called your window of
tolerance (Ogden et al., 2006; Siegel, 1999; Van der Hart et al.,
2006) (see figure 18.1). It is the range of experiential intensity that
is tolerable for each part of you and within which you can learn,
have an inner sense of safety, and be engaged with life. You may
know from experience that you learn most effectively and feel most
comfortable when you are not too agitated or anxious, nor too tired,
sleepy, or shut down emotionally. This is true for all parts of you.
When you, or other parts of yourself, are outside your window
of tolerance, you experience too much arousal, termed
hyperarousal, or not enough, termed hypoarousal. Sometimes your
window of tolerance might be quite small, like a window that is
barely cracked open. Then you, or some parts of yourself, can be

overwhelmed quickly and feel out of control or even completely
shut down. In that case, your task is to widen your window of
tolerance a little bit at a time until it is sufficient for coping with
daily life.
Each of us has our rather unique range of what we can tolerate;
our window of tolerance is to some degree defined by our inborn
temperament and natural level of physiological reactivity. But it is
also defined by experiences. When you have been chronically
overwhelmed, your ability to regulate your physiological arousal is
eventually compromised.
Figure 18.1. Window of Tolerance. Adapted from Ogden et al., 2006; Siegel,
1999; and Van der Hart et al., 2006.
Auto- and Relational Regulation
People regulate themselves by using a combination of relational
and self-regulation. The first is referred to as interactive regulation,
and the second, auto-regulation (Schore, 2001). Early caregivers
ideally help soothe and regulate an infant or young child by
nurturing, encouraging, attending to emotional and physical needs,
and comforting. This lays the groundwork for individuals to be able
to regulate themselves as they grow and develop. As adults, we call
upon others to support us when we are upset, because it can be
comforting to have another person present, and he or she helps us
view our problems from other helpful perspectives. And at times,
others are not available or needed. Then we are able to regulate
ourselves by reassuring ourselves, slowing down to reflect,
practicing calming exercises, or doing things that help ourselves
feel better.
The ability to employ a balance of auto- and relational
regulation is important. However, some people find it hard to rely

on others for any kind of support, that is, they do not use relational
regulation. Others find it hard to rely on themselves, that is, they do
not use auto-regulation. Both groups are at a significant
disadvantage, since we all encounter situations in which one way of
regulating is not sufficient or appropriate. We will discuss more
about auto- and relational regulation in chapter 29 on resolving
relational conflicts.
Lack of Reflection
A major difficulty in emotional dysregulation is that you are, at
times, unable to reflect on what you are feeling, but instead are just
“in” the feeling, acting blindly and not able to think clearly. You
may find that emotions from dissociative parts of yourself intrude
into your awareness. You may not always know where these
emotions are coming from, as though they are “out of the blue,”
and this adds to how overwhelming and frightening they can feel.
Avoidance of Emotion
Most people with complex dissociative disorders are very adept at
avoiding emotions. And there are certainly times when it is
important to focus on the task at hand and wait to deal with your
emotions until a later time. Although avoiding overwhelming or
intense feelings may help you function in daily life in the short run,
it also leaves you and other parts of you devoid of rich and
meaningful connections to yourself, to safe others, and to
experiences that make life worth living. And you also have little
ability to resolve painful or traumatic experiences.
Perhaps only certain experiences, such as having flashbacks, or
the threat of losing a relationship, push you, or some parts of you,
out of your optimal level of arousal. But the more afraid or
ashamed you are of your inner experiences, the more avoidant of
inner parts of yourself, the less ability to reflect, and the more
unresolved conflicts or traumatic memories you have, the harder it
is to stay within your window of tolerance. Thus, being able to
reflect is of prime importance in helping yourself learn to cope with
your emotions (review chapter 6 on learning to reflect).
As a first step, you need to find your window of tolerance and
learn to stay within it more consistently, and then gradually learn to
widen your tolerance level, like fully opening a window that had
only been cracked open previously. Each part of you will need to

learn to become more regulated. Once your tolerance level as a
whole person is wider, you can have a much broader range of
experiences that do not overload you. Overwhelmed parts of
yourself can feel calmer and more focused, while numb or avoidant
parts feel more capable of tolerating emotions and other inner
experiences. Thus, all parts of you gradually learn how to regulate
emotions and arousal levels, and each part of you can learn to help
other parts so that you, as a whole person, learn to deal with
emotions and all other experiences in ways that are more
constructive and adaptive. And as you learn not to judge your
emotions and other inner experiences and are able to reflect on
them without so much avoidance, you will find your window of
tolerance will increase, that is, you have more tolerance for a wider
range of experiential intensity.
A number of exercises in earlier sessions are actually designed
to help with emotion regulation and forming a healthy window of
tolerance, such as learning to reflect (chapter 6) and creating an
inner sense of safety for all parts of yourself (chapter 8). The
chapter on sleep (chapter 9) contains methods to soothe yourself
when you wake up feeling anxious or scared during the night. The
relaxation kit (chapter 11) furnishes you with a list of activities and
ways that help you and all parts of you feel more pleasant and
relaxed.
Next we explore some of the problems and solutions for
experiencing too much and too little.
Experiencing Too Much: Hyperarousal
Typically, some dissociative parts of yourself chronically
experience too much, that is, are hyperaroused, because they are
stuck in traumatic experiences and feel overwhelmed by fear, pain,
shame, and so forth. Or perhaps you, as a whole person, generally
feel so sensitive and edgy that it is very easy for you to become
overwhelmed and upset in daily life, even when you are not
bothered by traumatic memories. You, or some parts of you, might
be upset by situations that generally are of little consequence to
others, particularly small relational upsets or conflicts, or a last
minute change of plans. Once you are upset—agitated, anxious,
scared, or angry—it might be hard to calm yourself down (auto-
regulation). Time may seem slowed down as though you will be

upset forever, and you cannot remember being calm. This makes
you even more upset and urgent to stop what you are feeling.
When you are overwhelmed, your judgment is not at its best
and you, or another part of you, may impulsively try to stop the
intensity of your feelings by acting in ways that may not be in your
own best interest in the long run. For instance, people may drink,
use drugs, harm themselves physically, get into fights, say things
they later regret, or isolate from others. You may find yourself
puzzled about why you are so upset and cannot seem to understand
what happened: This sometimes occurs when a dissociative part of
you has become triggered without your awareness.
Tips for Coping With Experiencing Too Much
There are a number of ways to help yourself when you are feeling
overwhelmed. You can temporarily distract yourself and all parts of
yourself. You can contain particular feelings or memories or parts
of yourself in a safe place. You can express your emotions
appropriately. You can reassure and soothe parts of yourself. And
you can practice grounding exercises to help keep you in the
present.
You will receive the most benefit from the following tips when
you are able to reflect on what has evoked your hyperarousal and
begin to develop awareness of the struggles of various parts of you
that contribute to feeling too much. Empathic understanding of
your inner struggles and a willingness to seek out healthy coping
strategies to help all parts of yourself are essential to your healing.
Without inner awareness and empathy, most coping strategies are
not very effective.
Distraction
Temporary distractions help everyone who is feeling overwhelmed
from time to time. But it is important for all parts of you to
understand that conscious and voluntary distraction as a temporary
coping strategy is not the same as persistently avoiding the needs of
parts of you. Temporary distraction is just a way to slow down your
hyperarousal, like using a “reset” button. It gives you some time
where you can take a deep breath and rest, so you feel more able
and ready to cope with your feelings. An apt analogy is staying
busy to take your mind off of a strained muscle while you continue

to do the right things to help it heal, since focusing on the pain will
not alleviate it and will often make it seem worse. You do not
ignore the need to tend to your injury, but once you have done all
you can, you may distract yourself as you heal.
Distract yourself with healthy activities and support all parts of
yourself to refocus on something other than what you are feeling.
However, avoid working too much or engaging in other compulsive
distractions that will further stress you. When you distract yourself,
always make a promise to yourself that you will return later to what
is overwhelming, as soon as you are able.
What works for distraction may vary according to the way in
which you are feeling overwhelmed. For example, if you feel
overwhelmed with anger you might find a physical activity like
walking, running, or gardening helpful. But if you, or parts of you,
feel intensely sad, you might chose a soothing activity like
watching a nice movie, reading a (children’s) book, listening to
calm music, or going to your safe inner place. Try choosing
activities that match what you are feeling and that are agreeable to
all parts of you. Following are additional suggestions for distracting
activities.
• Exercise or take a brisk walk; changing your physiology can
change how you feel. Encourage all parts of yourself to
experience the walk.
• Listen to music while singing the lyrics.
• Do something pleasant or fun that all parts of you can enjoy.
• Call a friend and get together. Talking with another person
(not about the problem that is overwhelming you) can take
your mind of yourself for a while.
• Engage in an activity that requires concentration, for
example, a hobby, a crossword puzzle, or a computer game.
Try to encourage all parts of yourself to concentrate on the
same thing at the same time.
• Read an interesting or nice book that is not upsetting to any
part of you.
• Watch a comedy program or read a funny book. Again,
encourage all parts of you to focus on the same activity at the
same time. Laughter is a great distracter, and it helps you feel
better, too.

Containment
Contain, but do not ignore, feelings and parts of yourself.
Containment is entirely different from “getting rid” of your
feelings. When you contain a feeling or memory, and thus often a
dissociative part of yourself, you are saying to yourself, “Not now,
but I will return to this later.” You are making a promise to all
parts of yourself to make the time and energy to deal with it in the
right place at the right time. Be sure to take the time to check for
internal agreement among parts to contain an experience
temporarily.
You can use countless containment images: a bank vault,
floating up in a balloon floating high in the air, a submarine, a
computer file, a video, and so on. Use your own images that fit for
you or parts of you.
A different way to contain is to write or to use art to express
what you are experiencing. If this evokes too much for you, there
are other ways to contain. But some people find it helps to put their
experience on paper or canvas and then leave it there for later. You
may allow some parts of you to use this method if it is helpful,
while other parts need not be present, for example, by staying in
their inner safe place. You can put away these writings or drawings
or take them to your therapy appointments to help you move
forward in your healing.
Calming and Soothing Yourself
When you soothe and reassure yourself, you are not telling yourself
to stop having negative feelings, for example, “Shut up and don’t
cry. Put your happy face on.” This critical approach does not really
make any part of you feel better, even though it may be a long-
standing habit. Soothing and reassurance are much more effective
in calming all parts of you. Soothing includes an empathic
acknowledgement of the feeling, for example:
I am feeling sad and angry, and that is a hard combination. I am doing my
best to deal with these difficult feelings. It is in the best interest of all parts for
me to focus on what I am doing right now and then deal with them when I get
to therapy. That way I feel good about how I function in life and also have
support to work on these feelings.
This empathic acceptance also includes supporting all parts of
yourself, for example:
Since I am feeling so bad, I will do something nice for myself that all parts
can enjoy. It is OK for any part of me to have feelings, but I don’t want them

to overwhelm any part of myself. I will take care of all parts of me.
Following are some tips that help you to calm and soothe all
parts of yourself:
• Listen to all parts of yourself and try to reassure and comfort
any parts that may be anxious or upset; a little inner
communication and empathy go a long way.
• Practice calming, deep breathing exercises. Imagine that all
parts of you are breathing together, in perfect synchronization
in your safe place.
• Invite upset parts of yourself to go to a quiet, undisturbed
safe space where they can be soothed and helped, while
promising you will return to what is bothering them as soon
as you are able.
• It may also be helpful for you to take a short “time-out” to
rest.
• Ask a helpful inner part of yourself to support parts that are
anxious or upset.
• Try to slow your thoughts down and each time you notice
you are thinking about the problem, shift your thoughts to
something else. Help parts of you share thoughts at a
reasonable pace.
• Get some rest. Encourage all parts of yourself to rest. If parts
are critical, for example, “You are lazy and need to be doing
more,” try to negotiate with those parts of yourself for a
period of rest to see if it actually helps calm you down.
• Listen to soothing music and take into consideration what all
parts of you might find calming.
Grounding and Reassurance
• Use all five senses to ground yourself and be aware of the
present moment. Say out loud to yourself what you notice
with your senses.
• Try just noticing the experience of being overwhelmed, slow
your breathing down, and each time you feel the urge to do
something about the experience, allow that feeling or thought
to pass through you mind, like a train that does not stop a the
train station.
• Remind all parts of you that feelings are normal, a part of

life, and that it is safe to feel intensely in the present.
• Remind all parts of you that all experiences, no matter how
unpleasant or intense have a beginning, middle, and an end.
• Notice what was happening when you began to feel
overwhelmed. This may help you determine what triggered
you (see chapters 14 and 15 on triggers). It also reminds you
that the feeling had a beginning, and before which you were
feeling something else.
• Recall times in the past when the feeling finally passed, that
is, remember its ending, as a reminder that this feeling will
also end in time.
• Ask your therapist to help you with additional ways to cope.
• Talk to people you know and become curious about how they
handle intense emotions and what they do to calm themselves
down. You can learn from their experiences.
Experiencing Too Little: Hypoarousal
To avoid feeling the kind of intense hyperarousal described earlier,
you, or some parts of yourself, may cope through avoidance and
numbing; thus, you experience too little at times. This is called
hypoarousal. You, or avoidant parts of you, may evade situations
that would evoke too much feeling, which often means you avoid
being too close to people, since relationships evoke some of our
most intense feelings, positive and negative. Sometimes a part of
you may completely shut down for brief periods, going to sleep or
being unable to think. Some people may even become
unresponsive, unable to hear or respond to someone speaking with
them. You might tend to avoid thinking about anything painful or
unpleasant, which means you are not able to resolve issues that
involve pain and conflict.
Dissociative parts of yourself that feel numb and detached may
have little to no empathy for, or even awareness of, other parts of
yourself that very much need support and help with feeling too
much. It becomes easy for these parts to label certain feelings or
experiences as “bad,” and thus to be avoided (see chapters 16 and
17). Such avoidance strongly maintains dissociation and prevents
healing.

Tips for Coping With Experiencing Too Little
• Because shutting down is often the result of feeling
overwhelmed, most of the interventions used for feeling too
much are also appropriate.
• You, or a part of you, may tend toward hypoarousal when
you are stressed. A major solution is to first become
physically and then mentally active. If you, or a part of you,
feel sleepy when you are faced with something
overwhelming, try to get up and get moving. You must resist
the tendency to become more and more still.
• Help inner parts feel safer in the present by reassuring,
calming, and orienting.
• Try a brief, vigorous activity to get your heart pumping and
your energy level up, for example, jumping jacks, push-ups,
or running in place.
• Do not allow your eyes to focus in one place, or you will
trance out. Notice your environment. Use all five senses and
name the things you notice out loud, in order to ground
yourself in the present. If a part of you tends to trance out,
you may try putting a little temporary distance between you
and that part of yourself, for example, imagining actual
physical distance between you or allowing that part of you to
go to a safe space.
• Use mental stimulation to get your brain more engaged and
active, for example, count backward from 100 by threes or
sevens, or go outside and count trees or cars.
• If you have a feeling of being paralyzed, ask inside whether a
part of yourself can help you move. You can start with a very
small movement, such as moving your little finger just a bit,
blinking your eyes, or twitching your nose. Next try to make
other small movements in another part of your body. Focus
on moving as much as possible. Think of someone whom you
may trust—a friend, your therapist, your partner—and
imagine that person helping you. Sometimes a particular part
of you is immobilized and other parts of you can help by
tending respectfully and empathically to that part, giving
orienting information, comfort, and safety.
• If you feel cold or freezing (a common experience in
hypoarousal), try a warm bath or shower (not too hot). Or

wrap yourself in a blanket and place a hot water bottle or
heating pad on your stomach to warm your core. Then
imagine soothing inner parts as you warm up, using some of
the other resources available to you.
• If you, or a part of you, have physical numbness, note where
in your body it begins and ends, or whether you are
completely numb. Many people have at least small areas of
their body where they can feel. If you have such a place (for
example, your forearm), touch it gently and intentionally,
saying to yourself, “I am touching my forearm.” Scratch your
back with a soft, long brush; rub up against the door frame as
a bear rubs up against a tree; or wrap in a blanket to feel your
skin.
• If you are emotionally numb, notice whether you can feel just
a little bit of emotion, perhaps a 1 or 2 on a scale of 10.
Concentrate on the feeling, say it out loud, and draw the
attention of all parts of yourself to it. Remind yourself that
emotions can be safe; they are merely signals.
• You might ask whether any part of you could “share” a little
emotion with you, no more than you think you can tolerate,
for example, a teaspoon, a cup, or 5%. Also set a time limit,
so you can feel a little of the emotion just for a moment, say
to the count of 5, or 10 seconds or 30 seconds. As you feel
more able, you can increase both the amount and time you
experience an emotion. Notice as much of your inner
experience during this time as possible: what you think, feel,
sense, what you predict.
• If you are aware of certain parts of yourself that are severely
shut down, see if you can become more curious about what
they might need in order to be less shut down, and how you
might provide for some of those needs. Sometimes merely
the reassurance that you are really interested in tending to
them is enough to help these parts become more present and
alert.

Homework Sheet 18.1
Learning About Your Window of Tolerance
1. Place your current arousal level on a scale of 1 to 10, with 1
being the most extreme hypoarousal (feeling too little) and 10 being
the most extreme hyperarousal (feeling too much). On the scale
below, mark the range of your optimal level of arousal (not too
much or too little), that is, the range that is tolerable and relatively
comfortable. This is entirely subjective. There is no “right” answer.
For example, you might mark an area between 3 and 7, or 4 and 6.
Next, circle the points at which you might begin to work on
keeping yourself from going too high or low on the scale. For
example, if your range is 3–7, perhaps these points might be 2 and
6. Where on this scale would you need to stop what you were doing
to find a way to return to your optimal level of arousal?
Also notice whether any parts of you might have a different
window of tolerance.
2. Next, describe how you know you are within your optimal
arousal zone. For example, perhaps you feel calm, alert, relaxed,
pleasant, or energized. Perhaps you feel warmth or coolness in your
body, a sense of competence, a quiet or active mind. Your inner
experience when you are within your window of tolerance is like a
bookmark. You can memorize that experience, almost as though
you were taking a picture of it with your body, and return to it as
often as you need.
3. Finally, reflect on what helps you know you are about to, or
already have gone outside of your window of tolerance. For
example, you feel a whole-body tension, thoughts become
disorganized, your mind goes blank, you hyperventilate, parts
become noisy or you feel inner chaos, or you become drowsy. If
you can recognize these markers as they happen, you can stop what
you are doing and get yourself more grounded.

Homework Sheet 18.2
Your Tips for Coping With Feeling Too Much or Too Little
Make your own list of tips for dealing with too little feeling and
dealing with too much. Try to include all parts of yourself in this
exercise. You might be pleasantly surprised to find that you are
already using some skills or that some parts of you might have
some helpful ideas.
Helpful Tips for When I Am Feeling Too Much
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Helpful Tips for When I Am Feeling Too Little
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

CHAPTER NINETEEN
Understanding Core Beliefs
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: Understanding Core Beliefs
Introduction
The Origins of Core Beliefs
Negative Core Beliefs in People With a Complex
Dissociative Disorder
Realistic and Healthy Core Beliefs
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 19.1, Identifying Negative
Core Beliefs.
Complete Homework Sheet 19.2, Developing Realistic
and Healthy Core Beliefs.
Introduction
In chapter 17 you learned that unduly negative thoughts and beliefs
can play an important role in maintaining overwhelming and
dysfunctional emotions. Positive thoughts and beliefs that are
realistic can reinforce positive self-perception and contentment,
satisfaction, happiness, curiosity, and connection with others.
Persistent negative thoughts can evoke or reinforce feelings of
depression, anxiety, grief, anger, guilt, shame, or fear. And in turn,
these feelings reinforce yet more negative thoughts and beliefs.
When we are in a bad mood, our thoughts are more negative, and
thus we are more likely to see things in a negative light. This

interconnection among thoughts, emotions, perceptions,
predictions, and related decisions creates a cycle that supports our
unique experience of self, others, and the world, whether that is
largely negative or positive. Once a negative cycle begins and is
reinforced by negative situations, it becomes more difficult to
balance our perspective. And for people with a dissociative
disorder, various parts will have different perspective and beliefs.
In this chapter you will be working toward gaining a greater
understanding of some of your basic thoughts and belief systems
that originated in the traumatic past but which are not helpful in
your current life. Exploring and challenging these thoughts and
beliefs can be an effective point of entry for positive change.
The Origins of Core Beliefs
Our most basic, or core beliefs, are those which provide the
foundation for our view of self, others, and the world. They often
define what we believe about safety, trust, belonging, self-esteem,
competence, vulnerability, needs, and risk taking (Janoff-Bulman,
1992). For example, a realistic positive core belief might be: “Most
people are good and well intentioned, though they are not perfect;
however, a few people are truly dangerous and should be avoided.”
A negative core belief might be: “No one can ever be fully trusted
because they are looking out only for themselves; I should avoid
getting close to anyone for any reason.”
We all develop certain core beliefs whether they are negative or
positive. For those who have a dissociative disorder, various
dissociative parts of yourself may have different core beliefs, and
these may create much inner conflict (Fine, 1988, 1996). We will
discuss more about these conflicts in the next section.
Core beliefs have their origin in childhood and a few can
develop later in life based on powerful events. They can be
changed, but often people are not consciously aware of them.
Instead they might have automatic thoughts that seem true but
which they do not closely examine. For example, many traumatized
individuals have automatic thoughts such as “No one loves me. I am
worthless and stupid. I always fail at whatever I try. I am so ugly. It
is ridiculous that I need help: I am just weak and whiny.” Positive
change requires being able be aware of and reflect on core beliefs.
A number of factors play a role in the development of core

beliefs. Your inborn temperament affects the way in which you
naturally view the world. A person who is naturally introverted and
likes routine is likely to have somewhat different beliefs than one
who is extroverted and likes to take a lot of risks. Some people are
naturally more sensitive, while others seem less vulnerable to hurts
and abrupt changes. Some people naturally feel quite intensely,
while others have a more narrow range of feeling. These
differences can influence a wide range of core beliefs.
In addition, each family has collective core beliefs that are
passed down to the child, whether explicitly or unconsciously. For
example, if the implicit message in a family is that one should
never make mistakes, a child will develop the conviction that he or
she should always be perfect. Gradually such a child will develop
fears of making any kind of mistake, will become afraid of trying
new things, and will not be easily satisfied with whatever he or she
accomplishes. If the family core belief is that children are
important, competent, and lovable, a child will grow up with
confidence and feel secure in relationships. Core beliefs can also
develop based on whether early relationships are secure and
enduring. For instance, suddenly losing a parent at a young age
may result in feelings of abandonment and the belief that something
disastrous can suddenly happen, and that you can lose people you
love at any moment. Likewise, being abused by a caregiver at a
young age may result in strong beliefs that you cannot trust anyone,
ever.
Negative Core Beliefs in People With
a Complex Dissociative Disorder
Chronically traumatized people often suffer from persistent
negative core beliefs. These are deeply rooted convictions that
typically involve all-or-nothing thinking without balance or nuance:
“Things never work out for me,” “People always hurt me,” “I am
completely stupid and unlovable,” or “There is no safe place.”
These beliefs often contain words like always, never, or none. Such
thoughts and beliefs can profoundly influence, reinforce, and
intensify negative emotions. Negative core beliefs are reinforced
over time by negative emotions, perceptions, and predictions, and
by additional negative life experiences. The same is true for
positive core beliefs and attendant perceptions, emotions, and

experiences.
People with a dissociative disorder may find that their beliefs,
thoughts, and convictions may change suddenly or be in conflict,
since various dissociative parts may have different core beliefs
(Fine, 1988, 1996). Some thoughts and convictions are so
fundamental to the individual’s life experience that all dissociative
parts share them, for instance, “I cannot trust anyone” or “I will
never be safe.”
Individual differences in beliefs among dissociative parts are
related to the fact that each part has somewhat different life
experiences. Parts of you that deal with tasks and functions in daily
life are sometimes better able to observe and interpret the reality of
the present moment, without being influenced by too many old
thoughts or convictions. These parts have more distance from the
past, largely because they avoid it. Most dissociative parts that are
stuck in trauma-time suffer from negative, undermining thoughts
and convictions, because they view the world only through their
past experiences, without considering that the present may be quite
different. As a result, the reality of the present moment can easily
be distorted and relived in similar ways as the past as parts intrude
into daily life: This is what we have called living in trauma-time.
Even if there is some factual acknowledgment that the present is
different from the past, these core beliefs often seem so compelling
that they drown out current reality. Talking inwardly to these parts
and helping them by respectfully challenging their deep-rooted
convictions is a start, beginning with orienting them to present-day
realities. Correcting core beliefs is not easy and will take some
persistent work, but you can be successful over time.
Core beliefs affect your ability to reflect on your experiences.
For example, suppose you are walking down the street and see a
friend on the other side, walking in your direction. You wait for her
to say hello, but she just keeps walking without acknowledging you
at all. You could consider many different possibilities for what she
was thinking, and not just assume that she did not care about or was
angry with you. Depending on your core beliefs and your
perceptions, you or different parts of you may have some or all of
the following thoughts: (a) This person is preoccupied and did not
even see me; (b) This person is deliberately ignoring me; (c) This
person seems angry (with me); (d) She is walking fast to get away
from having to talk with me; (e) She feels hurt that I did not say

hello.
It is important for you to consider the possible intentions of
others, rather than jumping to the same conclusions based on
certain core beliefs, such as “People never like me.” Do your core
beliefs allow you to assume that people generally have no reason to
dislike or ignore you, and that most people are well intentioned? Or
do you believe that most people do not care about you and are just
out to get what they want from you? Perhaps different parts of you
might have different beliefs. Regarding the earlier example, some
part of you may think, “See! She ignored me. Nobody likes me. I am
worthless and will always be alone.” Yet another part of you has an
entirely different perception: “This isn’t about me at all. She
probably didn’t even see me.” These two very different sets of
thoughts, beliefs, and perceptions have different emotional tones:
one is highly negative, and one is positive or at least neutral. The
first statement reinforces old negative beliefs, whereas the second
statement supports a more positive and realistic view of the world.
Realistic and Healthy Core Beliefs
There are a number of generally accepted healthy core beliefs that
allow for a more balanced view of self, others, and the world. They
are more flexible and realistic. A healthy core belief is based on
both the positives and negatives of reality. For example: “I prefer
not to make mistakes, but I know I will, because no one is perfect.
When I do, I will work to correct it and not be too hard on myself.”
Or “Everyone needs help from others from time to time. Needing
help does not mean I am weak or lazy; it means I am human.” Or “I
can allow myself to relax and have a good time, just as I allow
myself to work hard when I need to.”
Of course, not everyone can always live in accordance with all
their beliefs or put them into practice every moment. You may be
quite convinced that something is healthy and good, but this does
not mean that you can always “practice what you preach.” But the
more you practice, the more healthy beliefs can become part of
your life. In Homework Sheet 19.2 you will find a list of some
realistic and healthy core beliefs, which might be helpful in
formulating your own.

Homework Sheet 19.1
Identifying Negative Core Beliefs
Below you will find lists of negative core beliefs about yourself,
about others, and about the world. Read each list and check or
circle five beliefs that affect you or parts of you most often.
Negative Core Beliefs About Yourself
• I am a failure; I never succeed in anything.
• I am an outsider and have no place to belong.
• I cannot connect with other people.
• I am utterly worthless.
• I am a bad person, ashamed of who I am.
• I am a weak person, always dependent on others.
• I should have never been born.
Negative Core Beliefs About Others
• Other people will always betray or hurt me.
• People are dangerous.
• Even if someone is nice, he or she is just waiting for the right
time to trick me.
• Nobody understands me.
• Nobody will ever love me.
• People will always take advantage of others.
• People will always abandon or reject others.
• People are only out for themselves.
Negative Core Beliefs About the World
• The world is a dangerous place.
• At any moment something terrible can happen.
• The world is always unpredictable.
• There is no place for me in the world.
• The world is full of pain and misery, nothing more.
List any other negative core beliefs not listed above that affect you
or other parts of you.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Notice whether all parts of you share the core beliefs that you
checked or wrote in above, or whether only some parts do. Choose
one of the beliefs and take some time to have an inner dialogue
about whether it is always correct in the present. Describe your
experience during this inner discussion. If you are not able to have
such a dialogue, please describe what stopped you from doing so.

Homework Sheet 19.2
Developing Realistic and Healthy Core Beliefs
Below you will find lists of healthy beliefs about yourself, others,
and the world. Please read each list and then complete the
homework below.
Healthy Core Beliefs About Self
• Pleasure and relaxation are normal, acceptable, and essential
life experiences.
• I accept myself the way I am. I have my stronger and weaker
points just like everyone else, and there is room for
improvement and growth in my life.
• I can set healthy limits and boundaries with other people.
• I am competent in being able to solve everyday problems by
myself most of the time.
• It is OK to ask for help when I need it, and I can manage
when help is not available.
• I can be in charge of my own life. I do not always have to
give in to what others want if it is not good for me.
• I feel I belong in the world and with others.
• It is OK that I don’t know everything.
• I don’t have to be perfect, just human.
• I am a decent human being.
Healthy Core Beliefs About Others
• Most people are decent and trustworthy; a few are not.
• Others are willing and available to help if I need support or
assistance.
• People care about and understand me for the most part.
• Important relationships can be stable and good, though not
perfect. Conflicts can be resolved.
• I can choose to be with safe people and avoid those who are
not.
Healthy Core Beliefs About the World

• There is a place for me in this world.
• Unpredictable things can happen in the world, but I have
resources and support to cope with most things.
• The world can be relatively stable and predictable much of
the time.
• The world can be dangerous, but I am usually safe.
• There is pain and suffering in the world, and there is joy and
love as well.
1. Check or circle any of these healthy beliefs you, or at least some
parts of you, already have. Describe any inner conflicts or
disagreements about those beliefs.
2. Check one belief in each category (self, other, and the world)
that you would like to work toward developing. Make sure you
share these beliefs with your therapist and the people around you
whom you love and trust. It might be helpful to ask others what
helped them develop healthy beliefs.
3. Notice any of your negative beliefs that include the words
always, everyone, none, or never. Try to shift the beliefs to a more
moderate position using words like sometimes, some people, or
occasionally. For example, if one of your beliefs is “I never
succeed,” challenge yourself and parts of you by naming a few
times when you have succeeded at something, even if small. At the
least, you have succeeded in staying alive, getting yourself into
therapy for help, and are trying your best to become healthier. See
if you can change the belief, “I never succeed” to “Sometimes I
succeed and sometimes I do not. I am doing my best, and I accept
that I cannot be perfect.”

CHAPTER TWENTY
Identifying Cognitive Errors
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: Identifying Cognitive Errors
Introduction
Common Cognitive Errors
Reflections to Identify and Explore Cognitive
Distortions
• Exercise: The Necklace of Positive Experiences
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 20.1, Identifying Your
Cognitive Errors.
Complete Homework Sheet 20.2, Identifying Types of
Cognitive Errors.
Practice the exercise The Necklace of Positive
Experiences, or a variation of it.
Introduction
In the previous chapter we discussed negative core beliefs, from
which dysfunctional thoughts stem. We noted that when you have a
dissociative disorder, you may experience conflicting thoughts
from other parts of yourself, which can influence your emotions
and actions in the present. Core beliefs are influenced and
reinforced by cognitive errors, which are exaggerated and irrational
patterns of thinking that perpetuate your problems (Beck, 1975;
Burns, 1999). These make it even more difficult to challenge and

eventually change your dysfunctional core beliefs about yourself,
other people, and the world around you. Cognitive errors are based
on insufficient and highly selective attention, that is, they do not
take into account the whole and complex picture of a given
situation and thus lead to inaccurate thoughts. As we have
explained, various dissociative parts are often geared to attending
only to certain aspects of an experience, for example, whether there
is danger, whether people are frowning or otherwise seem angry,
whether there is a way to get a certain need met. Such parts exclude
from awareness many essential cues that would help you, as a
whole person, to respond appropriately. In this chapter we will
explain several of the most common cognitive errors, and we will
help you learn how to identify these ways of thinking. In the next
chapter you will start to learn how to challenge and change rigid
thought patterns and cognitive errors.
Common Cognitive Errors
Everyone employs cognitive errors from time to time. This is
normal. But when they dominate your thinking and make life
difficult, they need particular attention. A major difficulty for
people who have a dissociative disorder is that many parts have
serious cognitive distortions (Ross, 1989, 1997). Typically parts of
you living in trauma-time have severe cognitive errors. These
influence your life in confusing ways, because not all parts of you
may think in the same way. Following are several commonly
identified cognitive errors (Beck, 1975; Burns, 1999).
• All-or-nothing thinking. You, or parts of yourself, perceive
everything as either black or white, yes or no, either/or.
Things are either good or bad; there is no middle ground.
Anything that is less than perfect is a disaster. People either
like you or hate you; they are kind or cruel; honest or
completely dishonest. If they ever say “no” to you, they have
permanently rejected you. This pattern leaves no room for
balance, nuance, or human frailties.
• Overgeneralizing. You, or parts of yourself, assume that one
experience generalizes to all others, so that once you have
had a bad experience, you believe that every similar situation
going forward will also be negative. For instance, you ask

someone out to see a movie, but she cannot go at the time
you suggest. You decide, or another part influences you, to
never to ask this person again, because it will never work out
anyway. You do not invite anyone else either, because you
have concluded that no one will ever want to be with you.
• Mental filtering. You, or parts of yourself, focus on a single
negative detail of an event and you can think of nothing else.
Positive experiences are rejected because you believe they
are not real, do not last, do not count, or are only the result of
luck. You lose perspective. For example, you prepared a nice
dinner, except the salad dressing was a little too tart. You
keep having negative thoughts about the dressing, how
people think you are incompetent and a terrible cook, and
you are convinced that the whole dinner was a complete
failure.
• Premature (arbitrary) conclusions. You, or parts of yourself,
make a conclusion without sufficient evidence. For example,
you conclude that you cannot go back to school or change
jobs; you cannot take up a new hobby because it would be
too time consuming; you cannot cook because you are bad at
it; therapy will not work for you; or your boss will never give
you a raise. Such conclusions are not based on facts, but on
underlying, often unconscious assumptions.
• Mind reading. You, or parts of yourself, assume you know
what another person is thinking. You do not check out
whether your assumptions are accurate. In other words, you
do not use reflective skills. For example, your boss asks you
to come into his office for a moment. You immediately
assume he is angry with you and is going to fire you because
he does not like you.
• Catastrophic predictions. You, or parts of yourself, assume
that something awful is going to happen, that things are going
to end badly no matter what you do. You consider this an
unchangeable fact, as though it had already happened. For
example, “Why should I study for this exam? I’ll fail
anyway.”
• Magnification. You, or parts of yourself, magnify personal
failings or mistakes and blow situations out of proportion.
For example, you forgot an appointment with your therapist
and think: “I am a terrible, irresponsible person. My

therapist will fire me. I am so stupid. This is unforgivable.”
Or perhaps another critical part of you begins to berate you
for being so “irresponsible and stupid.”
• Emotional reasoning. You, or parts of yourself, assume,
because your feelings are all powerful, that reality is
determined only by what you are feeling, regardless of other
facts and experiences to the contrary. For example, “I feel
like a bad person; therefore, I am bad.” “I feel anxious and
unsafe in the presence of that person; therefore, she is not
safe.” “I feel like something terrible is about to happen;
therefore, I must get away before catastrophe strikes.” All
things being equal, you should be able to trust most of your
feelings. But if they derive from dissociative parts of yourself
that live in trauma-time, that is, are not oriented to the present
or are hyperfocused only on specific aspects of an experience
to the exclusion of others, these thoughts are more likely to
be inaccurate and not fit with current, external reality.
• “Should /ought to” explanations and statements. You, or
parts of yourself, bombard yourself with statements such as
“I ought to . . . I should . . . I could have. . . .” Often these
statements are experienced as an inner voice that berates you,
that is, a critical part of you that continually tries to correct
your actions. Examples: “You ought to be more available
after hours for your work: Don’t be so lazy”; “You should be
able to make therapy work faster; you aren’t trying hard
enough”; “You should have been able to stop thinking about
the past by now.” This constant inner criticism does not lead
to healthy change, but rather to more shame, guilt, anger,
resentment, and sense of failure.
Reflections to Identify and Explore Cognitive
Distortions
To correct cognitive errors, you must be present and use reflective
skills (chapter 6). It is also essential to begin to learn to connect,
communicate, and collaborate with all parts of yourself over time,
so you can understand their thinking. Next you will find a number
of questions on which you and all parts of you can reflect to help
you identify and explore cognitive errors. When you have an
immediate negative thought about a situation, it is a good idea to

examine that thought more carefully than usual. Because it is so
automatic, it may involve a cognitive distortion. You will need
some communication and collaboration with parts of yourself. It is
usually quite helpful to check with all parts of yourself to see
whether there are conflicting thoughts about an experience. It may
be helpful to write answers to these questions and understand that
different parts of yourself may have different answers. If this is so,
the conflicts are the place to begin with empathic reflection: “I
wonder why that part of me has such a different experience than I
do? What can I learn about that part of myself, and how can I help
that part of me?”
• Is there evidence that a bad experience from that past will
always happen in the future?
• Have I taken into account the complete context of the
situation? Can parts of me help me to do so?
• Do I have memory loss about a situation and thus have made
assumptions that may be incorrect? Do other parts of me
have a different perspective on what happened?
• Are there also positive aspects of an experience that I (or
other parts) am ignoring or have not noticed?
• Did I check with all parts of myself to see whether there is
internal agreement on a certain conclusion, especially if my
conclusion seems to fit one of the cognitive error categories
(see earlier discussion)?
• If the worst would happen, is it really true that I could not
handle the situation? Do I have other choices about how to
handle a bad situation?
• Is my decision or conclusion based solely on feelings? If so,
what are the feelings?
• Do the feelings make logical sense for the situation?
• Is there any evidence that my feelings are influenced by parts
of myself that are stuck in the past?
• Are these thoughts helping me to function better and to feel
good about myself and others?
• Do all parts of me agree with these thoughts?
• Can I or other parts of myself offer reasonable
counterarguments to these thoughts?

IMAGERY EXERCISE: THE NECKLACE OF POSITIVE
EXPERIENCES
The following is an exercise that may help you experience more of the
positive aspects of life. This kind of experience is not meant to deny or
minimize your painful and difficult times, but rather is one of many ways to
soothe, calm, and reassure yourself, so you feel stronger and better able to
cope.
This exercise uses the image of a necklace or armband made with various
beads. If this image is not suitable for you, try another, such as weaving a
tapestry with threads of positive experiences, or imagine a garden of flowers
or beautiful mosaic, or a book with beautiful pages. You can find the right
image for you. You can make a scrapbook or piece of art as well, if you
would like something more tangible.
Imagine that you, and all parts of yourself, are making a
beautiful necklace or armband for yourself. It is crafted from
lovely beads. Wooden beads, glass beads, ceramic beads,
metal beads, beads of light, beads of water, beads of stone—
you can use whatever material appeals to you. But in addition,
these beads have a very special quality: Each one represents a
good, positive, enjoyable experience in the present. These
experiences do not have to be big, just simple things that have
added a moment of contentment, satisfaction, happiness, or
calmness to your life. For example, it could be a nice cup of tea
with your feet propped up, a walk in the woods, a good night’s
sleep, a dinner with a friend, a feeling of being accepted and
understood by your therapist, a sense of progress in your
healing, satisfaction in finishing a project. Let each part of you
add beads. You might add proud beads, poignant beads,
hopeful beads, happy beads, silly beads, playful beads, safety
beads, loving beads, funny beads, or friendly beads. And also
beads of strength and serenity, perseverance and peace,
courage and kindness, resilience and rest. You are making your
creation just as you want it. You can even turn it into a vest or
coat or blanket that covers you! You can look at your creation,
wear it, hold it, see the light glint off the various beads. Feel
their weight, whether they are light or a little heavy; feel their
texture, whether they are smooth or rough. There may even be
beads that make sounds like little cheerful tinkling bells or soft
clicks and clacks. You are completely free in the design of your
creation. And if it helps you, you can also imagine that you have
a very special box in which you can keep it. If you have such a
box, or choose to make one, you can also keep notes or other
mementos of special events or moments in your life. In this

way, you can return time and again to experiences that are
good and pleasant. After all, our memories are not only of
painful experiences but also of good and positive ones.

Homework Sheet 20.1
Identifying Your Cognitive Errors
1. Review the list of cognitive errors in the text above. List below
those patterns of thoughts that apply to you, or to other parts of
you, on a regular basis. Give examples, if possible.
2. Describe any instances when one part of you does not share the
cognitive error(s) of another part of you.
3. Describe a recent situation in which you had to contend with one
of these patterns of thought. Describe the thought and name the
particular cognitive error(s) involved, and a possible challenge to
the thought.
Example
Cognitive error: People ignored me at a party, and I felt no one cared
about me.
Effects of cognitive error: During the party I felt ashamed and like I was
an alien. A part of me was screaming to go home, and another part was
telling me what a jerk I was. Afterwards I felt really lonely and wanted to hurt
myself and withdraw from the world.
Possible challenge: I am not yet comfortable at parties and made no
effort to speak. A few people said hello, but I hardly responded, so they
moved on. Perhaps it isn’t that they do not like me, but that I am too anxious
to make conversation. I wonder whether maybe I give off a message to leave
me alone.

Homework Sheet 20.2
Identifying Types of Cognitive Errors
Below you will find three examples of cognitive errors. Read each
one and then read the challenge to each distortion. Below each
example write the cognitive error at play. You can refer back to the
list of cognitive errors, if needed.
Example 1
“I can see by your face what you are thinking. You are angry with me.”
Challenge: Actually, although facial expression may give you a hint
about what someone is thinking, you cannot actually know for sure without
checking it out; that is, you cannot read someone’s mind. And because of
negative experiences in the past, you (or certain parts of you) often only pay
attention to signs that might indicate threat, and not to those that might
indicate safety. So if the person is slightly frowning, you may interpret this as
being angry and expect that this person will harm you in some way. In fact,
the person may not be angry, but rather may be trying to concentrate on what
you are saying, or maybe even has a headache.
What is the cognitive error?
Example 2
You are having dinner at a friend’s home and he steps into the kitchen for a
moment to finish preparing some food. The phone rings and he hurries toward
the phone, which is near where you are sitting. He is still holding the knife he
has been using to cut up the vegetables. You see the knife, you or other parts
of you are triggered, and you no longer perceive your friend accurately. In a
flash you expect he is going to attack you.
Challenge: Although a part of you is triggered, another part knows your
friend would never hurt you and is not dangerous. You are able to look
around and see where you are. You recall your long and wonderful history
with your friend. All is well and the fear is something within you, not outside.
What is the cognitive error?
Example 3
You live next door to a family with small children. Every time you hear one
of the children cry, you or some other parts of you believe something terrible
has happened to them.

Challenge: In reality, you notice that these children do not cry often or
for long periods of time; their parents quickly comfort or help them; they do
not scream in anguish; they seem otherwise happy, healthy, energetic,
playful, and social. There is no reason to think that their occasional crying is
anything but quite ordinary.
What is the cognitive error?

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
Challenging Dysfunctional Thoughts
and Core Beliefs
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: Challenging Dysfunctional Thoughts and Core
Beliefs
Introduction
Feedback Loops
Exploring Your Thoughts When You Have a Complex
Dissociative Disorder
Reflections for Understanding and Challenging Your
Core Beliefs and Thoughts
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 21.1, Challenging
Inaccurate Thoughts or Core Beliefs.
Complete Homework Sheet 21.2, Developing Realistic
Positive Thoughts and Beliefs.
Introduction
In the last two chapters, you learned how cognitive errors can
influence, reinforce, and maintain negative core beliefs and
thoughts. You learned that emotions affect how you perceive
situations and the intentions of other people, what you predict will
happen in the future, and how you act. It is as though you have on
colored glasses and everything you perceive is tinted by that color.

And parts of you may have on different colored glasses from each
other. In this chapter you will learn more about how emotions, core
beliefs, thoughts, and certain cognitive errors are related, and in
turn, how these affect your ability to size up a situation accurately,
particularly relational situations.
Feedback Loops
As we noted before, emotions, cognitions, perceptions (how you
interpret a situation), sensations and movement, predictions (what
you expect will happen in the future), and decision making all work
together in a seamless feedback loop (Van der Hart et al., 2006).
Each gives and receives feedback from the others. In this way, we
can develop relatively fixed and closed ways of being in and
viewing the world: We are in a negative feedback loop. For
instance, negative core beliefs promote and maintain overwhelming
emotions, and vice versa.
As an example, let us return to the scenario of the friend who
walks past without acknowledging you. If you are not being
reflective when you see her walk past, you may have an immediate
reaction. This reaction is based on a feedback loop consisting of the
following:
• Perceptions (seeing her walk past without greeting you; her
eyes straight ahead)
• Thoughts (“She doesn’t like me. I’m such a loser.”)
• Emotions (shame, hurt, anger)
• Sensations (roiling in the pit of your stomach, flushed face)
• Movements (hunched shoulders, downcast eyes, urge to run
away and disappear)
• Predictions (“No one will ever like me; things will always end
badly for me.”)
• Decision making (“From now on I will avoid people. I’d
rather be by myself.”)
• Actions (isolation, avoiding phone calls from people, turning
down requests to do things with others)
You can see how these experiences are not sequential; that is, one
does not precede or cause the other, but each affects the others
simultaneously. All are part of one package.

You may only be aware of one of these experiences, such as an
emotion. Perhaps as your friend walked past you felt shame. You
can identify the shame, but you feel too frozen or collapsed to think
consciously. But your perceptions, predictions, emotions, and so
forth imply the presence of thought. These cognitions, called
automatic thoughts, are related to core beliefs, and they can be just
beneath the surface of your awareness, so insidious and quick that
you do not catch them. They often contain cognitive errors, such as
all-or-nothing thinking and overgeneralization (“Nobody cares
about me.”). As you become more proficient in reflecting—perhaps
in retrospect at first—you can begin to identify and explore all the
others experiences: perception, prediction, thoughts, sensations, and
movements. In this chapter you will be focused on identifying
negative thoughts and core beliefs within this feedback loop and
learning to explore and challenge them.
The importance of reflection and the ability to adjust your
responses to the present carry over into the future, because you base
your predictions about what comes next on your current
perceptions, thoughts and beliefs, emotions, and so forth. For
example, if you or certain dissociative parts of you believe your
friend has deliberately ignored you, you may start avoiding that
person and remain angry, hurt, or ashamed. If you happen to see
her again, you are vigilant in looking for cues that she is rejecting
you. Her every movement, every ambiguous sentence, every facial
expression is now scrutinized for signs of rejection. And because
you predict it, you can easily interpret what you see as rejection.
You may completely cut off contact with your friend, reinforcing
your beliefs that no one is safe and you are unlovable, and leaving
you in a painful state of shame and loneliness. When all parts of
you can be more open to the possibilities of more neutral or
positive alternative interpretations of a situation, you may not feel
so negative about yourself and some of those around you.
You can see from this example why it is vital to learn to
recognize thoughts that arise from old negative core beliefs, and
then to consider reflectively whether these thoughts are still valid in
the present. Are they correct? What proof do you have? Can you
think of any experiences that provide evidence to the contrary? Do
these beliefs help you achieve your goals of being safe, connected,
and self-assured in the world? Using such questions can help you
challenge some of your beliefs that may not be adaptive in the

present.
Of course, even when you recognize that a situation is not
harmful to you, you may still feel strongly that it is, because some
part(s) of you may be stuck in the past. This gap between what you
know cognitively and what you feel can be bridged with inner
reflection with all parts, which will help you begin to understand
and resolve inner conflicts and lack of orientation to the present. In
the next section we will address how you can explore your thoughts
and practice reflecting each day at your own pace. Progress comes,
even though it may be in small increments.
Exploring Your Thoughts When You Have a
Complex Dissociative Disorder
When you have chronic dissociation, exploring your thoughts can
be especially challenging because of inner conflicts and barriers
among various parts of yourself. You may not be able to recall
specific situations, that is, you may have amnesia, so it may be hard
to know what another part of you was thinking at the time. You
may have thoughts that seem to pop into your mind out of the blue,
and you may have no idea where they came from or what they are
about, because they belong to parts of yourself of which you are not
very aware. And you may feel muddled and confused if several
different thoughts from various parts are swirling around in your
head simultaneously. Some of these thoughts may not seem to
belong to you, but nevertheless they are in your mind and can
influence your perceptions, emotions, behaviors, and predictions.
As we explained earlier, some parts stuck in trauma-time may have
their own feedback loops that are different from yours, so they have
difficulty in accurately perceiving the current situation, or even at
all. They experience the present as the past and may have never
questioned the accuracy of their thoughts and emotions, and their
interpretations of the present circumstances.
Even with these inner struggles, you will find it valuable to
explore consistently your thoughts and core beliefs and how they
affect your emotions, predictions, decisions, and actions. You can
begin with thoughts about a situation you clearly remember. As
inner communication increases among all parts of yourself, you
will become more aware of the thoughts of particular parts and how
you can more effectively reflect on and help adjust those thoughts.

All parts of you can participate in helping you as a whole person
learn to change your beliefs over time. Eventually, parts of you that
have more realistic and positive core beliefs and thoughts can help
those with more rigid and negative ones.
Reflections for Understanding and Challenging Your
Core Beliefs and Thoughts
When you want to explore and challenge upsetting or negative
thoughts about a particular situation, you can reflect by using the
following questions as a guide. You may not know all the answers.
That is fine. But the more you practice, the better you will become
at understanding your beliefs and eventually changing them.
• Start with describing the situation. What happened? Do you
clearly remember the situation? Have you taken into account
the whole context of the situation? If not, can you ask parts
inside for help in understanding?
• What thoughts did you, or parts of yourself, have? If more
than one thought came into your mind, try to write them
down, even if they are contradictory.
• Check the list of cognitive errors in the previous chapter to
see whether any apply to your thinking.
• Decide which thought evoked the most negative emotion.
Does this thought seem as though it is your own thought, or
does it seem to belong to a part of yourself? If to another part
of you, can you communicate compassionately with that
part?
• What proof do you have that your perception of the situation
and thoughts about it are accurate in the present?
• Are there any positive aspects of the situation that you (or
other parts) are ignoring or have overlooked?
• Have you or parts of you had any experiences that contradict
your perceptions and thoughts about this situation?
• If you were to share your thoughts about your experience
with someone whom you trust, what do you imagine that
person would say?
• If someone else was involved in the situation, would you be
willing to check out your perceptions and thoughts with this
person?

• What counterarguments or alternative explanations could you
think of that might be different from the way you perceived
the situation and the thoughts that you had?
• If thoughts clearly belong to other parts of you, talk inwardly
or organize an inner meeting to discuss the possibility that
these thoughts might not be completely accurate in the
present situation (see also chapter 27 on decision making).

Homework Sheet 21.1
Challenging Inaccurate Thoughts or Core Beliefs
1. Describe below four dysfunctional or inaccurate thoughts and
core beliefs of which you were aware this week.
2. Next write down statements or experiences that challenge or
refute the thought or core belief (perhaps with the help of other
parts of yourself). If needed, reread the list of realistic healthy core
beliefs in chapter 20. If some parts disagree with refuting
statements, write them down anyway, and put a check or star next
to them. You can later establish dialogue with these parts of
yourself to reach inner common ground.
3. Describe any inner obstacles to challenging your thoughts and
beliefs.
4. Describe, if you are able, options for reducing the inner
obstacles.
Example
1. Dysfunctional thought or core belief: I can never do anything right!
2. Refuting statements and experiences: I got out of bed, took a shower,
ate a healthy breakfast, and completed my homework. I did all those
things right. I can do some things right.
3. Obstacles to changing the belief: Part of me kept telling me I couldn’t
even get out of bed the right way because I just wasn’t right as a
person. Another kept yelling, “Stupid! Stupid!”
4. Solutions to inner obstacles: I need to acknowledge I am a little
afraid of being OK, not wrong all the time. I can empathize with parts
who berate me with the intention that I won’t make more mistakes. I
can notice what happens inside when I actually do something right.
Dysfunctional thought or core belief:
Refuting statements and experiences:

Obstacles to changing the belief:
Solutions to inner obstacles:
Dysfunctional thought or core belief:
Refuting statements and experiences:
Obstacles to changing the belief:
Solutions to inner obstacles:
Dysfunctional thought or core belief:
Refuting statements and experiences:
Obstacles to changing the belief:
Solutions to inner obstacles:
Dysfunctional thought or core belief:
Refuting statements and experiences:
Obstacles to changing the belief:
Solutions to inner obstacles:

Homework Sheet 21.2
Developing Realistic Positive Thoughts and Beliefs
Make a list of your own realistic positive beliefs and thoughts.
Include all parts of yourself in this exercise, and write down even
those beliefs with which all parts do not agree.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

PART FIVE
SKILLS REVIEW
You have learned a number of skills in this section of the manual.
Next you will find a review of those skills and an opportunity to
develop them further. As you review, we encourage you to return to
the chapters to read them again and repractice the homework a little
at a time. Remember that regular, daily practice is essential to learn
new skills.
For each skill set below, answer the following questions:
1. In what situation(s) did you practice this skill?
2. How did this skill help you?
3. What, if any, difficulties have you had in practicing this
skill?
4. What additional help or resources might you need to feel
more successful in mastering this skill?
Chapter 17, Mindfulness Exercise
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 17, Identifying Emotions
1.
2.

3.
4.
Chapter 18, Strategies for Coping With Feeling Too Much and
Too Little (distraction; containment; calming and soothing;
orienting to the present; activity and mental stimulation; taking
care of parts of yourself)
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 18, Learning About Your Window of Tolerance
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 19, Identifying Your Negative Core Beliefs
1.
2.

3.
4.
Chapter 19, Developing Realistic and Healthy Core Beliefs
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 20, The Necklace of Positive Experiences Exercise
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 20, Identifying Your Cognitive Errors
1.
2.
3.

4.
Chapter 21, Challenging Your Inaccurate Thoughts or Core
Beliefs
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 21, Identifying Realistic and Healthy Beliefs
1.
2.
3.
4.

PART SIX
Advanced Coping Skills

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
Coping With Anger
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: Coping With Anger
Introduction
Understanding Anger
Anger in People With a Complex Dissociative Disorder
Tips for Coping With Anger
Working With Parts of Yourself to Cope With and
Resolve Anger
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 22.1, Understanding Your
Experience of Anger.
Complete Homework Sheet 22.2, Understanding and
Coping With Angry Dissociative Parts of Yourself.
Introduction
Anger is natural and healthy. However, it can be a powerful and
frightening emotion. People who have been seriously traumatized,
especially by other human beings, typically have strong feelings of
anger, rage, and even hate and revenge. It is completely natural to
react with anger as a way of protecting or distancing yourself when
someone has hurt you intentionally. However, when anger becomes
chronic and unresolved, when it is inhibited over long periods, or is
uncontrolled and expressed in destructive ways towards self, other
parts of you, or other people, it becomes a hindrance to

relationships and to personal healing. In such cases, present-day
anger is nearly always intensified by and mixed up with past anger
that is unresolved. In this chapter you will learn more about the
meanings of anger and how to regulate and manage anger, whether
you experience it yourself, or another part of you does.
Understanding Anger
In the sections that follow you will find some facts about anger that
will help you change how you view and cope with this emotion.
Common Inaccurate Beliefs About Anger
One of the most difficult aspects of anger is how intense and
overwhelming it can feel; a lot of energy is generated in the body,
and the physical sensations of anger are very powerful. After all,
anger is an inborn tendency designed to support us in threatening
situations. Some people believe their anger gives them a sense of
strength and makes them feel good; they are afraid if their anger is
“taken away,” they will lose their power and energy. Of course, it
may well give them strength for the moment, but there are many
other ways to find energy and a sense of being in control of oneself
while still being appropriately angry at the right times.
Many traumatized individuals feel ashamed of their anger,
because they believe anger is “bad,” or they believe they will be
punished and rejected if they express or even feel anger, or because
they fear being angry makes them “just like” the people who hurt
them. They fear losing control, yet their anger remains intense and
easily provoked. Like many intense negative emotions, anger is
often disowned and held in various parts of the personality, so that
other parts need not experience it but will react in other ways
instead.
It is essential to remember than anger is an emotion that guides
behavior, not a behavior in itself. Anger as a feeling is not
dangerous or bad; it is an inevitable part of life. It is how you cope
with anger that makes it adaptive or not.
Anger as a Substitute for Other Emotions
Anger can sometimes be a substitute for other emotions that are
hard to tolerate. For example, it is not uncommon for people to
express anger when they feel ashamed or afraid. They may strike

out at others, or toward themselves, or even both, as noted in
chapter 24 on shame and guilt. Various dissociative parts may
strike out at each other. Anger also inhibits grief: Sometimes it is
important to finally grieve over what you have lost and cannot
have, rather than continue to be angry that you do not have it.
Grieving is an important way of coming to terms with the reality of
what is and then being able to move on. Anger can keep people
stuck, unable to find other ways to get what they need. When anger
is a cover for other emotions, an important part of anger resolution
will be to accept and resolve those emotions.
Expression of Anger
Many people are afraid to express anger but also believe the only
way to deal with it is to “get it out.” Intense physical or verbal
expression of anger may be relieving in the moment, but often it
does nothing to resolve chronic anger and does not change how
anger is experienced internally. That is, expression of anger, in
itself, does not create positive, healthy shifts in thinking, feeling,
and perceiving. There are many ways to express anger, some
healthy and some destructive. For example, healthy expressions
include respectfully talking about it with someone, writing,
drawing, respectful inner dialogue, working toward positive
resolution of problems about which you feel angry, dealing with
underlying emotions such as shame, or accepting that you cannot
change a situation and moving on.
Destructive expressions of anger include persistent revenge
fantasies or actions, hurting self or others, “taking it out” on
innocent people (or animals), or destruction of property. Some
people or parts may feel the need to express anger physically, by
hitting a pillow, for example. Although there is nothing wrong with
this, it does not solve anger and may actually heighten your
emotion. Only when anger is paired with behavioral control and a
significant change in core beliefs is it healing. For example, a
negative core belief might be, “I deserve to be angry for all the bad
things that have happened to me.” This could be changed to
something like, “I was hurt and justified in my anger. Now I can let
it go and make room for other feelings, since continual anger does
not help me function and have a better life. I can accept my own
anger and not be afraid of it.”

The Experience of the Angry Other
Traumatized people often experience the anger of others as
dangerous and terrifying: They may associate it with their abuse
and thus link it with terrible and out-of-control behavior. However,
it is important to realize that feeling angry and acting destructively
are two different things, and there are many ways to express anger
that are not dangerous. Everyone feels anger from time to time, and
most people are able to feel and express it appropriately without
being hurtful to others.
Anger in People With a Complex Dissociative
Disorder
Next we describe some unique issues regarding anger that need
attention in order for you to manage your anger successfully.
• Specific parts of your personality may be angry and are
usually easily evoked. Because these parts are dissociated,
anger remains an emotion that is not integrated for you as a
whole person. Even though individuals with a dissociative
disorder are responsible for their behavior, just like everyone
else, regardless of which part may be acting, they may feel
little control of these raging parts of themselves.
• Some dissociative parts may avoid or even be phobic of
anger. They may influence you as a whole person to avoid
conflict with others at any cost or to avoid setting healthy
boundaries out of fear of someone else’s anger; or they may
urge you to withdraw from others almost completely.
• Parts of you that are phobic of anger are generally terrified
and ashamed of angry dissociative parts. There is often
tremendous conflict between anger-avoidant and anger-
fixated parts of an individual. Thus, an internal and perpetual
cycle of rage-shame-fear creates inner chaos and pain.
• You as a whole person are thus unable to reconcile conflicts
about anger and learn to tolerate and express anger in healthy
ways. Inner turmoil and dissociation are maintained.
These problems with anger can be resolved with patience and
persistence, as you learn to have inner understanding, empathy,
communication, and cooperation among all parts of yourself. Next

we discuss common types of angry parts.
Dissociative Parts Fixated in Anger
Dissociative parts of a person that are stuck in anger may
experience this feeling as vehement and overwhelming, often
without words. They may have irresistible urges to act aggressively
and have great difficulty thinking and reflecting on their feelings
before acting. Angry parts have not learned how to experience or
express anger in helpful ways.
There are two types of angry dissociative parts. The first are
parts that are stuck in a defensive fight mode, ready to protect you.
Their anger at original injustices may be legitimate and naturally
accompanies a ten-dency to strike out or fight, which is an essential
survival strategy. However, such parts have become stuck in anger,
unable to experience much else. They rigidly perceive threat and ill
will everywhere, and they react with anger and aggression as their
only option of response. Although these parts of you may not yet
realize it, anger is often a protection against vulnerable feelings of
shame, fear, hurt, despair, powerlessness, and loss.
The second type of angry part may seem very much like the
original perpetrator(s). They imitate those who hurt them in the
past, and they can be experienced internally as the actual
perpetrator(s). This experience can be particularly frightening,
disorienting, and shameful. But be assured this is a very common
way of dealing with being traumatized. In fact, although these parts
may have some similarities to those who hurt you, they also have
significant differences: They are parts of you as a whole person,
who is trying to cope with unresolved traumatic experiences.
Sometimes these parts may seem more powerful and aggressive
internally toward other parts than they are externally, although in
some cases, these parts may also act out toward others. And just as
fight parts, they also exist to protect you, and they often hold
unbearable feelings of rage and powerlessness that you have not yet
been able to accept as your own.
Typically the beliefs of angry parts protect them against
awareness of any perceived weakness, vulnerability, or
incompetence that might lead to rejection, ridicule, or abuse. You
may hear voices inside that say things like, “Therapy is for crazy
people; you are crazy and everybody knows it”; “You are such a
cry-baby”; “Stop whining”; “Why do you think you would get a

raise? Your boss thinks you are an idiot.” These parts make every
effort to maintain “safety” by avoiding mistakes and vulnerability,
and they do not allow the development of what seems to them to be
false hopes that could be dashed. Even in situations where different
ways of coping might be more adaptive, they maintain their rigid
way of perceiving, thinking, feeling, and acting, because they are
still living in trauma-time. For example, no matter how consistent
and safe your therapist seems, an inner voice may caution against
trust because “it won’t last and she’ll just kick you when you’re
down. She just wants to control you.”
Finally, angry parts are often afraid that they are unwanted.
Indeed, until a better understanding of these parts develops, most
individuals wish to be rid of them. It is important to realize that
angry parts, like all parts, belong to you as a whole person. You
may not like their methods, but the underlying intent is to protect
you. You can always learn different and more effective ways to
protect yourself, and these dissociative parts can participate and
actually become your best inner allies. You can learn from them
that you indeed are able to protect yourself in the vast majority of
situations. The fact is, healthy anger is an innate capacity with
survival value and is not only normal but necessary in some
circumstances.
Parts that imitate a perpetrator(s) typically reenact aspects of the
traumatic past. Often, they parrot what was said to you, or similar
messages, in an inner voice that sounds like the perpetrator(s).
These statements typically result in your feeling worthless and
unloved, ashamed and fearful, just as you did in the past. For
example, many people with a dissociative disorder hear angry
voices that say things such as, “You asked for it”; “You are so
stupid”; You don’t deserve anything”; “If you tell, I’ll hurt you, so
shut up.” In truth, these parts are not yet able to distinguish between
past and present. As we mentioned earlier, they live in trauma-time.
Therefore, they often have a lonely position, ostracized from and
despised by other dissociative parts, and the objects of inner fear
and shame. They are part of an internal reenactment of the
traumatic past that endlessly loops and involves all parts of the self.
Dissociative Parts That Avoid Anger
Other dissociative parts avoid anger at almost all costs, as noted
earlier. Some may be stuck in the past, believing or merely sensing

that anger makes them more vulnerable, that is, invites more pain
and suffering. Thus, these parts, just like angry parts, have limited
and rigid ways of protecting themselves. Anger-avoidant parts
always tend to minimize or deny their needs or desires, work to
appease others, and have a propensity to freeze or shut down. Such
parts almost never feel anger even when it would be appropriate to
do so. They may associate anger with the perpetrator, which is
confusing and frightening. They judge the behaviors of angry parts
and are afraid or ashamed of them. Parts that avoid anger often
associate anger with loss of control, infliction of pain, and being
“bad.”
The person as a whole thus experiences an impasse: She or he is
stuck between the opposing beliefs and defenses of anger-avoidant
parts and anger-prone parts. Some parts believe it is dangerous and
shameful to be angry, while others believe it is dangerous and
shameful to be vulnerable.
Tips for Coping With Anger
• Anger occurs in many gradations, from mild irritation or
annoyance, to anger, to rage. The sooner you are able to
make these distinctions and can become aware of mild anger,
such as irritation, the easier it is to intervene before anger
becomes overwhelming.
• You can learn to be aware of your own physical signs of
anger. Anger is typically associated with a tight or tense
feeling in your body, clenched jaws and/or fists, feeling
flushed or shaky, breathing heavily, rapid heart rate, a feeling
of heat, or a surge of energy throughout your body. Noticing
your body sensations can be a powerful way to know whether
you are angry. You may have learned to automatically react
to physical sensations that accompany anger as triggers to
avoid angry emotions or thoughts.
• Angry parts may seem like internal “enemies” or
“troublemakers,” but actually they are not, even those parts
that act like perpetrators. They are simply one way in which
you try to cope. You must learn to empathize with their
plight of having very limited coping skills and being shunned
by other parts, alone with their hurt and fear and shame,

while not accepting their inappropriate behavior, whether
internal or external.
• Once you feel some empathy toward these parts, you can
begin to communicate with them, listening with more
understanding about what is “underneath” the anger. And you
can also ask your therapist to help you communicate with
angry parts.
• It is important for angry parts to realize that you will not “get
rid of” them, that they have protective functions, and are
invited to participate in therapy along with all other parts of
you.
• Angry parts are strong parts that can be gradually encouraged
to use their strength in more positive ways, such as helping
you to attain impor-tant goals in your life, and helping you be
more assertive when necessary.
• It is not wrong to feel angry. Anger is an inborn, normal, and
inevitable human emotion that is universal. It is only
important how you express it outwardly or inwardly. Does it
help you get what you need without hurting anyone? Is it
respectful? Is it within your window of tolerance? Does it
lead to positive experiences instead of more negative ones?
• Notice whether the intensity of the anger that you, or some
parts of you, feel is appropriate to the situation. It might help
to check how other people would respond to the same
situation. For example, you might notice whether you are the
only person in a meeting that consistently gets angry because
people seem so incompetent, and if so, become more curious
about why others do not seem to be struggling with anger in
those situations.
• Try creative and healthy nonverbal ways of expressing your
anger: writing, drawing, painting, making a collage.
• Physical exercise may help as an outlet for the physical
energy generated by the physiology of anger.
• Reflect on your anger, that is, try to understand your anger
rather than just experience it. You might imagine observing
yourself from a distance and being curious about why you are
so angry. It is easy to blame circumstances or others for the
way you feel, but really, it is your own internal thoughts,
perceptions, and predictions that fuel your anger. Noticing
them and being able to change them will be enormously

helpful, instead of focusing on the external object of your
anger.
• Give yourself a time-out, that is, walk away from a situation
if you feel you are getting too angry. Count slowly to 10, or
even to 100 before you say or do something you will regret
later. Practice calming breathing. Distract yourself. Help
inner parts calm themselves.
• Of course, what works for one part of you may not work for
another part. It is important for each part of you to have ways
to calm down that work. While some parts may benefit from
distraction or soothing, others might find it more helpful to
engage in vigorous physical activity. Listen to yourself, to all
parts of you, and take into account the needs of each part of
you.
• Have an inner conversation with parts of yourself about anger
and how to express it. Allow all parts of you to share their
fears and beliefs about anger. Negotiate toward small and
safe ways to express anger that are agreeable to all parts of
you.
• Anger, like all emotions, has a beginning, middle, and end.
Notice when it starts. Notice what intensifies or decreases it.
Notice your inner thoughts, sensations, perceptions, and
predictions. Notice what various skills and supports are
needed by different parts to cope with anger more
appropriately.
• Watch safe people in your life and see how they handle their
own anger. Do they accept being angry? Are they respectful
and appropriate with their anger? Are there particular
strategies they use that you could practice for yourself?
• Healthy anger can give positive strength and energy. It can
help you be appropriately assertive, set clear boundaries, and
confront wrongs in the world. Anger can pave the way to
other emotions, leading to the resolution of relational
conflicts.
• Learn the most common triggers of your anger. Once you
learn these triggers, you can be more aware when they occur
and more able to prevent an automatic reaction of anger.
Establish inner communication among parts of yourself to
recognize triggers and negotiate possible helpful strategies to
cope with them rather than just reacting.

• You can try allowing yourself to experience just a small
amount of anger from another part of yourself: a drop, a
teaspoon, 1% or 2%. And in exchange, you can share with
angry parts feelings of calm and safety.
Working With Parts of Yourself to Cope With and
Resolve Anger
As soon as you are aware of feelings of irritation or anger, imagine
holding an inner meeting to understand whether this anger is
something all parts of you share, or if it is experienced only by
certain parts of you. Make an effort to notice what triggered these
feelings. It is very important not only to notice external triggers but
also internal ones. The most powerful internal triggers for angry
parts are any signs of perceived weakness or neediness: crying,
yearning, fear, shame. “Child” parts, for instance, may feel terrified
or cry internally, which evokes angry parts that typically treat the
young parts in the ways similar to how you were treated as a child.
Again, they may do so in order to prevent anticipated abuse from
others, as they experienced in the past, or as an automatic
reenactment. Their goal is to prevent any “weakness” in misguided
efforts to keep you safe.
This is why inner safe places for younger parts of yourself are
so important (see chapter 8). If they are experienced as being in a
safe place they are less activated by triggers. Internal safety for
these parts in turn decreases the need for angry parts to feel rage or
impotence. Angry parts often learn quickly that it is to their
advantage to allow other parts to feel safe and calm; it helps them
feel less agitated and exhausted from being angry all the time. In
fact, every part of you benefits from every bit of internal safety you
can achieve.
Finally, it can be helpful for angry parts to have their own inner
safe places and states. This can be an inner space where they do not
feel threatened, that is, a quiet place, where they do not have to hear
or care for or protect other parts (including younger parts of
yourself) and where they cannot do any harm and cannot be heard
by other parts. They can thus begin to experience new, more
positive feelings simply by temporarily eliminating the vicious
internal cycle of vulnerability-shame-rage. However, it is essential
that parts are not “forced” to be locked away in order to “get rid”

of them or as punishment. Safe places and states must be entirely
voluntary and for the intent of safety and calm, not avoidance. If
you need help, your therapist can help you create these inner safe
and calm states.
Challenging Core Beliefs and Using Reflection to Resolve
Anger
Anger may arise because situations in the present are interpreted or
perceived from the point of view of the past. You can learn how to
distinguish whether your anger is a response to the present, to the
past, or to both, and whether its intensity is appropriate to the
situation. For instance, if someone is late for a meeting with you
because he or she was stuck in a traffic jam, a part of you may feel
angry in reaction to the feeling of rejection or being ignored. It will
be helpful to ensure that all parts of you know what is actually
happening in the present so that you can more fully realize that the
person’s lateness was not intentional nor meant to hurt you. Often
parts of you still live in trauma-time and are not fully aware of the
present context. They only feel anger and react as they have in the
past. They may believe, for instance: “Others do not think that I am
worth anything, so they do not care if they keep an appointment
with me. They want to hurt me on purpose.” If these parts are not
aware of present circumstances (for example, a traffic jam
prevented the person from being on time), and if they cannot
understand that the person may have no bad intentions, they can
never correct this belief, and the anger will be perpetuated.
Taking Time Out
If your anger tends to escalate quickly, especially in relation to
other people, the best strategy is to leave the situation immediately.
If you are in a relationship, you can make a contract with your
partner in which each of you has your own particular signal which
indicates the need to have a time-out. Once you have left the
situation respectfully, it is important for all parts to help each other
calm down. The most important skill to use is reflection. Try to
stop being in your anger long enough to calm down and recognize
your anger. Then you can reflect on the situation, on how overly
intense you feel, and what thoughts, perceptions, and predictions
you may have that perpetuate your anger. You can use any method
to calm yourself that suits you—walking, sports, listening to music,

practicing relaxation exercises, or going to your safe place. If you
have a partner, it is essential to have an agreed-upon way in which
to discuss the situation later in a calm way, when you both are able
to empathize with and understand the other’s position, just as you
are learning to do among parts of yourself.

Homework Sheet 22.1
Understanding Your Experience of Anger
Describe a current situation in which you or some part of you felt
anger.
1. Describe the situation.
2. What thoughts did you or other parts have during the situation?
3. Describe any tendency to turn the anger in on yourself (by you or
any part of you). What were the thoughts or beliefs about yourself
that evoked anger toward yourself?
4. Describe your physical sensations of anger, for example,
heartbeat, trembling, sweating, cold, hot, and so forth.
5. Describe any tendency to avoid your anger, for example, spacing
out, distracting yourself, feeling depersonalized, or switching to
another part.
6. In retrospect, describe any inaccurate or maladaptive perceptions
of the situation or of your own anger, for example, some part of
you experienced your therapist as “just like” a person from the past
who hurt you.
7. Describe any attempts at inner communication during or after the
event to better work with and understand the situation. What was
helpful (or not) about the communication?
If you were not able to engage in any inner communication,
please describe what stopped you. For example, it did not occur to
you to do so; you felt it was useless; you did not want to stop being
angry; you are too afraid of the angry part(s) of yourself; or some

part of you would not “allow” it.
8. What distracting or calming techniques did you or parts of you
try to use, if any? Describe how they were or were not effective.
9. List two healthy coping strategies that you and all parts would
like to learn to use when you feel angry in the future. Describe the
obstacles in the present to using them.

Homework Sheet 22.2
Understanding and Coping With Angry Dissociative
Parts of Yourself
If you are aware of or suspect you may have angry dissociative
parts of yourself, please complete the following homework sheet.
1. Describe how you know a part of you is angry (for example,
hearing an angry voice, being told you were acting angry but not
recalling the episode, feeling anger “out of the blue” that makes no
sense to you).
2. Describe your response to angry parts of yourself (for example,
you feel ashamed or afraid, or you freeze).
3. Describe reactions of other parts, if any, to angry parts of
yourself (for example, they feel afraid, cry, or get busy with other
things)
4. Do you know whether angry parts interact in some way with
other parts of yourself? If so, in what ways (for example, criticizing
or berating)?
5. Could you begin to empathize that angry parts of yourself may
be trying to make you function better, although in misguided ways?
Describe some possibilities, for example, a part tells you that you
are a failure. The intent is to protect you from the painful
consequences of failure by convincing you that you cannot succeed
anyway.
6. Could you imagine that angry parts of you are trying to keep you
away from relationships in order to keep you from getting hurt or
disappointed again? If angry parts of you try to convince you that
you cannot trust or get close to others, please describe.

7. Even though it might seem strange, try to thank angry parts of
you for trying their best to help keep you safe. Could you allow
yourself to have a little more empathy for those parts of yourself,
even though you should not tolerate any unacceptable behavior?
After all, being angry all the time is exhausting and lonely. Perhaps
these parts of you would like to learn additional ways to cope that
might feel better to you as a whole person.
8. Invite angry parts of you to have their own inner safe space,
where they will not be disturbed by inner or outer chaos.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
Coping With Fear
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Topic: Coping With Fear
Introduction
Understanding Fear
Problems With Fear for People With a Complex
Dissociative Disorder
Tips for Coping With Fear
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 23.1, Reflecting on Your
Experience of Fear.
Introduction
Fear is one of the most pervasive and problematic emotions for
traumatized individuals, and it is an essential symptom in trauma-
related conditions, such as PTSD and complex dissociative
disorders. It is a universal hyperaroused reaction to perceived threat
or danger. From birth, every person has this innate emotion of fear
when sufficiently threatened (Panksepp, 1998; Tomkins, 1963; see
chapter 17 on emotions). Fear is a “life-preserving” emotion that
signals our bodies to initiate survival strategies such as fight, flight,
freeze, or collapse. Fear and anxiety become a problem when they
are chronically activated in the absence of threat in the present, or
when they remain activated for stimuli that are not actually
dangerous. Chronic fear is a universal problem for people with a
complex dissociative disorder, at least for some parts of the

personality, because many parts are stuck in the past in fearful
situations, and fear has become a generalized conditioned response.
Understanding Fear
Physiological Reactions to Fear
The physical sensations of fear are very intense and, in themselves,
may feel overwhelming. Typical symptoms include shaking,
increased heart rate and blood pressure, sweating, nausea, hot and
cold flashes, dizziness, racing thoughts or difficulty thinking, and
shortness of breath or hyperventilation accompanied by tingling of
the hands, feet, and face. When you are afraid, your sympathetic
nervous system pumps out adrenaline (among other activating
substances) into the body, instantaneously giving you an intense
burst of energy for a flight-or-fight reaction. This happens in
milliseconds, long before you have a cognitive understanding about
what is happening, often before you can even identify the trigger.
Your body reacts as though you are in imminent danger before you
are consciously able to discern whether there really is actual
danger. In fact, you and all parts of you are always anticipating the
(near) future: You are forever making instantaneous (and often
unconscious) predictions about what will happen, before your
conscious thoughts can catch up (Siegel, 1999).
If your relationships and your world have been relatively
predictable, safe, and secure, you are more able to predict
accurately. But when you have been unsafe, and have lived in an
unpredictable and chaotic world, you learn to expect danger, even
where there is none. Thus, you have become conditioned to have
fear reactions. Normally, once you have evaluated the situation and
decided there is no real danger, your body calms down quickly with
the help of the parasympathetic nervous system. However, when
you have been chronically traumatized it is as though the “alarm
bell” in your body is almost always going off, with your fear in
overdrive, no matter how much you try to convince yourself that
you are safe.
Collapse
When you feel fear, you or a part of you immediately reacts to
protect yourself with inborn defense strategies that involve

hyperarousal: flight, fight, or freezing. However, if you become too
hyperaroused, too terrified, eventually your body may shut down
into a collapse mode and become extremely hypoaroused, a state
which we discuss further in the next section. This is the last line of
defense and is usually related to severe life threat, although it can
become a more generalized conditioned response in chronically
traumatized individuals.
Fear of Inner Experiences
For most traumatized individuals, fear is not only evoked by
external triggers but also can be a strong reaction to inner
experiences that may be frightening or sudden, such as an
overwhelming emotion, a traumatic memory, or the voice of an
angry or crying dissociative part (see chapter 5, on the phobia of
inner experience). You may have strong fear reactions to your own
inner experiences, for example, avoiding what is fearful in yourself
(flight), becoming angry (fight) with another part of yourself, or
freezing in fear and being unable to move when you become aware
of inner activities of parts of yourself.
Fear Versus Anxiety
Fear can usually be distinguished from anxiety. Fear is a reaction to
threat or danger, focused on a specific stimulus, whereas anxiety is
more generalized without a specific target and is typically
associated with apprehension and dread. Anxiety has a wide range,
from mild to severe. Fear is experienced as an intense, even violent
emotion, associated with swift and drastic changes in the body.
Panic is also intense, but short lived. When people experience
anxiety they are often unable to specify the cause of the anxious
feelings. Anxious people might generally feel that something bad
will happen, but they are unable to know what it is, or perhaps they
fear “losing control,” having a heart attack, or being unable to
function.
Generally, people can distinguish between fear and anxiety.
However, for people with a dissociative disorder this recognition is
often difficult; although they experience fear, they are often
unaware of dissociative parts that have the emotion, or of the
reason these parts are so afraid.
Fear and Anxiety Can Be Healthy

There are many situations in which some fear or anxiety is an
appropriate reaction. Fear is an important signal of threat, and if
you are unable to recognize danger, you may put yourself at risk.
Some dissociative parts do not feel fear because they avoid cues of
danger, or do not notice potential danger because they are focused
on something else. For example, a part intent on being with another
person at all costs may ignore, dismiss, minimize, or avoid blatant
cues that the other person is seriously dishonest or even violent.
Other parts may intentionally seek out danger as a punishment, or
because they feel it is their “lot in life” to be hurt, for example, by
walking alone at night in an unsafe area.
Problems With Fear for People With a Complex
Dissociative Disorder
When you have a dissociative disorder, different parts of yourself
are likely stuck in fear responses, while others may avoid fear with
distancing or distracting strategies. These reactions have been
discussed in a number of previous chapters, including chapter 4 on
PTSD, chapter 5 on inner phobias, chapters 14 and 15 on triggers,
and chapter 17 on emotions.
Dissociative parts of you that experience chronic fear are almost
always hyperalert and easily aroused. Their “alarm bell” never
turns off, activating not just the emotion of fear but also the entire
response set of thoughts, sensations, predictions, and perception of
danger. For example, when you are in session and your therapist
gets up to retrieve a calendar or box of tissue, a fearful part of you
may be instantaneously afraid, expecting danger or hurt, on the
lookout for cues that indicate danger, predicting the therapist is
about to hit you, and does not recognize the fact that you are in
your therapist’s office in the present, and nothing out of the
ordinary is happening. Such a part will perhaps have the urge to run
out of the room or hide under the desk (flight), or it may be frozen
in fear (freeze). These parts are not (adequately) oriented to the
present, and thus they do not respond to the present, but rather to
the past: They live in trauma-time. An angry part may be evoked
that is meant to protect you (fight) and becomes angry with the
therapist for being insensitive or even for intentionally scaring you.
Occasionally, you, or a part of you, may become so overwhelmed
by fear that you collapse and are unable to move and or be verbally

responsive. Next we describe some specific problems you may
encounter with fear.
Experiencing Fear Without Knowing Why
You may often experience fear but may not have any idea why you
have this reaction, because perhaps you avoid your inner
experience. Your fear may be so strong that you find yourself
reacting without being able to think through what is happening. For
instance, you may feel a sudden strong urge to leave a certain
situation and find that your legs seem to start walking or even
running on their own, or that you cannot sit still and are completely
preoccupied with finding a way to leave. Or you find yourself
avoiding a common situation at all costs without understanding
why, such as going to the dentist, taking a bath, or being in the
backseat of a car. You are aware of the urge or behavior, but it does
not seem to come from “you.” These “unexplained” urges can often
be understood as arising from other dissociative parts of yourself.
Sometimes you may not even be aware of the fact that fear is
influencing your behavior. For example, suppose you need to go
shopping, and you leave your house only to find yourself back in
your home some time later, without having done your shopping at
all. Or you find that you have been walking around the store in a
daze for a while without buying anything. Or you set out to drive to
the store but instead drive around town for an hour without thinking
very much. You may feel a vague unease but cannot put your finger
on it, or perhaps you feel completely numb, nothing at all. You may
lose time, or you may consciously decide that you will do
something besides shopping without knowing why you have
changed your mind, even though you need food.
Perhaps later, you realize these experiences are related to the
activation of a scared part of you. A part of you may find shopping
terrifying because so many decisions must be made (for example,
what foods to choose and how much) that could be judged as
“wrong,” and then you would be punished. Or a part may be
terrified of the crowds in the store. You may not have been aware
that these parts of you were activated at the time and you did not
feel fear. Or you may have felt afraid without knowing why. You
only know that you experienced time loss, were dazed, distracted,
or unable to complete your tasks. The more inner communication
you have, the more you will be able to deal with situations like this

more effectively.
Inappropriate Fear in the Present
You, or some parts of you, may feel fear even though you know it
is not appropriate in the present situation. Yet you cannot rationally
talk yourself out of the feeling and feel the urge to act on the
feeling rather than on what you know. You may even be aware that
a part of you is terrified, but no matter how much you try to
reassure that part, you feel no less fear.
Failure to Feel Fear in a Threatening Situation
Some people with a dissociative disorder report that they have been
in a dangerous situation in the present and felt no fear at all. They
were able to act calmly and rationally, sometimes robotically, and
managed to come through the situation without harm. This is
adaptive on the one hand, but it may leave other parts of you with
fear that is unresolved. In this case, a dissociative part of you that
does not feel much of anything may be able to cope with a
situation, while other parts may hold those feelings of fear and even
get stuck in chronic reliving long after the event is over.
Acting Recklessly Without Appropriate Fear
In other cases, the inability to feel fear may not be adaptive at all.
Some dissociative parts are so oblivious to danger and fear that
they do not register it. This is a major disadvantage of having
dissociative parts that are rigid and limited in their emotions,
perceptions, predictions, actions, and so forth. Such parts do not
attend to real threat cues and emotions, but rather only (or mostly)
to cues that fit with their own tendencies, for example, going to
work or doing tasks around the house. Some dissociative parts may
become “counter-phobic,” that is, act the opposite of being afraid of
something, even though some parts may indeed be afraid. This may
have been an original survival strategy, but the actions of these
parts may put you in dangerous situations, such as being in unsafe
places or with unsafe people, driving fast and dangerously, or
provoking fights with other people without paying heed to the
consequences.
Sometimes people with a dissociative disorder may have
amnesia for what they have done and only hear reports from other
people about these reckless behaviors; others may be aware but

unable to influence their actions. These behaviors may create inner
critical judgments and conflicts, resulting in more polarization
among parts and thus more dissociation. For example, reckless
parts often feel disgust and disdain for fearful parts, while fearful
parts, of course, are terrified of destructive parts. And parts that
conform to social rules are shocked and outraged, wanting to
punish or “get rid” of reckless parts of the self.
Although it may be difficult to understand the behavior and
motives of parts that engage in endangering behaviors, it is
important to realize these may be attempts to overcome fear,
however maladaptive, or prove to yourself that you can be tough or
that no one can control you. Commonly, these parts engage in high-
adrenaline activities to avoid inner pain and to gain a sense of
mastery over fear. They seem unaware that they need to reflect on
their inner experience rather than focus on external activities that
support their avoidance. Thus, internally there remains a vicious
cycle of fear that provokes feelings of extreme powerlessness,
which provokes disgust and disdain, which provokes shame, which
provokes anger, which provokes fear, which provokes more
reckless behavior.
Tips for Coping With Fear
In previous chapters we have described many tips and techniques to
help you cope with intense emotions: Virtually all of them can be
used to cope with fear. In the list that follows, you will find some of
the most essential steps toward reducing fear in yourself, and in all
parts of you.
• Take some time to reflect inwardly and check with parts of
you about whether they feel fear.
• Try to identify the trigger(s) that evokes fear in you or other
parts of you, that is, notice what you are reacting to internally
or externally that makes you afraid.
• Try to gauge your level of fear and determine whether it is
appropriate to the situation. Is your fear based on an
inaccurate perception of the present situation, perhaps a
perception based in trauma-time? If so, support all parts of
you to accurately perceive and become more oriented to the
present.

• After reorientation to the safe present, calm yourself or parts
inside, using any techniques that are helpful for you or
different parts inside. Remember that all parts may not be
helped by the same technique. Be flexible with yourself.
• Practice some of the exercises you have learned in this
manual (or any others that you know) to regulate yourself.
• If you feel frozen (hypoaroused without being able to move),
you may begin by making small movements, perhaps first by
blinking your eyes, moving your fingers and toes, and
gradually moving your arms and legs. If you feel cold, warm
yourself by wrapping in a blanket or having a hot drink or
bath, or putting a heating pad or hot water bottle on your
chest and stomach. Use safe space and relaxation exercises to
help solidify a sense of calmness and safety for all parts of
you.
• If you know in advance that a certain situation is likely to
evoke fear, you can make a plan to deal with it ahead of time
(see chapter 16, on planning ahead for difficult times). Help
parts of you go to your inner safe space, so they do not have
to endure a potentially frightening experience, such as having
an uncomfortable medical procedure, until they can be more
oriented to the present. In other situations it is helpful to
gather all parts in an inner meeting place and explain the
situation ahead of time and make plans for safety. Once parts
are able to reflect, they will be able to change their habitual
patterns of response, including fear reactions.
• Dissociative parts that do not feel fear may be helpful in
many situations, for instance, being able to visit a doctor or
dentist, or cope with other potentially triggering situations
without undue fear. While some parts of you may still be
stuck in trauma-time and are not yet oriented to the present
sufficiently, such parts can be of great help in these
situations.
• If parts engage in reckless behaviors, you will need to begin
communication with these parts to decrease their risky
actions. If needed, you can enlist the help of your therapist to
deal with these parts of yourself.

Homework Sheet 23.1
Reflecting on Your Experience of Fear
1. Describe a current situation in which you or some part of you felt
fear. Choose an example that is not likely to overwhelm you.
2. Describe thoughts or beliefs you or other parts of you had during
the situation.
3. Describe what triggered your fear, if you know.
4. Describe your physical sensations of fear (for example, rapid
heartbeat, trembling, sweating, cold, hot).
5. In retrospect, do you think your fear was based on an inaccurate
perception of the situation, that is, based on trauma-time? If so,
describe the perceptions.
6. Describe any attempt at inner communication during or after the
event. Describe how it did or did not help you. If you were not able
to have any inner communication, describe what prevented you
from reflecting.
7. Describe any techniques that were helpful to you, or in
retrospect, might have been helpful if you had been able to use
them.
8. List two healthy coping strategies that you and all parts of you
would like to learn to use when you feel afraid in the future.
Describe the obstacles to using these strategies in the present.

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
Coping With Shame and Guilt
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: Coping With Shame and Guilt
Introduction
Understanding Shame and Guilt
Shame Scripts
Understanding Guilt
Tips for Coping With Shame and Guilt
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 24.1, Coping With Shame.
Complete Homework Sheet 24.2, Coping With Guilt.
Introduction
Chronically traumatized individuals almost always experience a
devastating sense of shame about who they are, in addition to being
ashamed of what has happened to them. In addition, people with a
dissociative disorder typically feel ashamed of some parts of
themselves, and perhaps even of the fact that they have a
dissociative problem. Because interpersonal trauma affects sense of
identity and self so profoundly, your very essence and existence
can feel shameful to you.
Many experts consider guilt as a particular type of shame that is
focused on being ashamed of one’s actions (behaviors), even
though it may feel different than shame. Some describe guilt as
about what you do, involving a fear of punishment or retribution,

whereas shame is about who you are. In any case, guilt about our
behavior can easily lead to shame about ourselves in a broader way.
In this chapter we will discuss both emotions, as they are so linked
together, with the major focus on shame. Both emotions involve
awareness and evaluation (judgment) of ourselves and of how
others may perceive us. And both emotions are nearly universal in
trauma survivors.
Understanding Shame and Guilt
Shame is one of the innate emotions that all of us experience
(Dorrepaal et al., 2008; Nathanson, 1992; Tomkins, 1963; see
chapter 17), and yet it can be one of the most destructive emotions
for traumatized individuals. Shame involves a sense of failure,
incompetence, and defeat.
When children grow up in loving families, they are praised for
each developmental step, helping them achieve a healthy sense of
pride. But for children who grow up in neglectful, critical, or
abusive homes, these achievements may be ignored, disapproved,
ridiculed, or even punished. These children feel shame that may
become pervasive and destructive over time.
Feelings of shame and guilt can be induced or reinforced by
other people. Many perpetrators tell a child the abuse is his or her
fault. Such messages have a major effect when the relationship is
one of unequal power and authority (for example, a parent blaming
a child). Sometimes a perpetrator threatens terrible punishments if a
child tells, so his or her sense of guilt and shame, coupled with fear,
becomes almost consuming. And certain religious or cultural
beliefs may also induce a chronic sense of shame and guilt.
Shame has intense physical manifestations: head down, eyes
lowered and averted, flushing, changes in breathing, confusion or
inability to think, and a sense of collapse or freezing. In this
condition people seem only able to recall examples that prove how
bad or worthless they are: the test that they failed, the deadline they
missed, how ridiculous they must have sounded in a conversation
with someone, how people must sense or know how dirty and
disgusting they are on the inside. They have intense flashbacks of
shameful moments, relived over and over. When people feel this
overwhelming kind of shame, they want to be invisible or even die,
and they find it horrifying that anyone might get to know who they

really are. In fact, they do not even want to know themselves.
Shame and guilt in small and time-limited doses serve useful
purposes, helping us conform to the norms of our social and
cultural groups, supporting development of conscience and
morality, promoting good behavior, and even influencing our
identity. A little appropriate shame or guilt might prod us to try
harder to accomplish a reasonable task well, or be a better friend,
parent, or coworker.
But the kind of shame and guilt we are discussing in this
chapter goes far beyond those healthy bounds. It is a chronic,
pervasive, and sustained experience of yourself as an utter failure, a
flawed and defective human being, unworthy of love or life. These
unresolved emotions can be paralyzing, and they can profoundly
affect your self-esteem and your relationships with others. Shame is
often directed towards your body, an extension of how you see
yourself as a person: how unattractive or ugly you must seem to
others, how ungainly or clumsy, how weak or useless.
When you feel chronic shame, you believe that no amount of
punishment or corrective actions would be sufficient, and you are
unable to forgive yourself or have any empathy for the terrible
suffering shame brings to you. It is as though chronically ashamed
people have received a life sentence of shame with no hope of
parole, even when they are unsure of exactly why they are bad. In
fact, some people will say there is no particular reason they are bad
and unworthy: The mere fact that they exist and take up space on
the earth is shameful enough. They believe they are not worthy of
living and do not deserve anything good. In such cases, shame is an
emotion of hiding: The last thing an ashamed person wants is to be
open, vulnerable, and seen by others. Thus, it is an emotion that
often is not addressed sufficiently in therapy, even though it is a
major impediment to healing.
As noted earlier, when people feel ashamed, they are reacting to
perceived failure or inadequacy. Thus, they always view
themselves from the perspective of others. In other words, shame is
always based on predictions that others will view them as bad,
incompetent, or stupid. Shame does not require the actual presence
of another person, but merely an inner imagining of how another
person might judge and find them incompetent or bad. Often people
are unaware of this inner prediction of being judged, but only of a
profound sense of worthlessness, unfocused fear, and sometimes of

paranoia.
Extreme and pervasive shame and guilt no longer serve as
helpful signals that help guide our behavior and the development of
our morals and ethics, but rather have become a way of being, a
core identity that brings misery to nearly every aspect of a person’s
life. And quite naturally, people will try to avoid the extreme
suffering of shame. To this end, there are four patterns of reactions
(or scripts; Nathanson, 1992) that people employ to prevent
experiencing the emotion of shame, illustrated in Figure 24.1.
Figure 24.1. The Compass of Shame. Adapted from Nathanson, 1987.
Shame Scripts
Unresolved shame is a major barrier to resolving dissociation
(Kluft, 2007). As Lynd (1958) noted, “Shame is the outcome not
only of exposing oneself to another person but of the exposure to
oneself of parts of the self that one has not recognized” (p. 31).
There are four basic maladaptive scripts that perpetuate unresolved
shame and that are quite typical for people to employ (Nathanson,
1992). In fact, various dissociative parts of yourself may employ
different of these responses. The more you learn how to recognize
and intervene to change these automatic reactions in yourself and
all parts of you, the more you will be able to resolve shame. These
reactions include (1) attack self, (2) attack others, (3) avoid inner
experience, and (4) withdraw from others (isolation). Each of these
reactions involves a particular set of strategies that attempt to avoid
shame, and each is associated with different perceptions,

predictions, feelings, thoughts, decisions, and behaviors.
Attack Self
In this strategy, you, or a part of you, accept the beliefs of shame,
such as being inadequate, stupid, or incompetent, as true without
reflecting on those beliefs. Thus, you turn anger and disgust
inward. For example, a person who feels ashamed while working
on this chapter might feel self-directed rage for being “stupid,” for
not already knowing enough to stop being ashamed, for having to
deal with shame in the first place, even for thinking about shame.
The entire experience is negative, and the more negative, the more
self-directed anger, contempt, or disgust is evoked, which only
magnifies the effect of shame. Thoughts involve a heightened
awareness of all the things you have done wrong, your faults, and
negative characteristics. The behavior is to criticize yourself (or one
part criticizes another part) in order to prevent reoccurrence of the
shameful situation by forcing yourself through criticism to be
“better” or even “perfect.”
You may be aware of the negative experience of shame (for
instance, “I feel so bad that I can’t do anything right.”) and the
message of shame is accepted as true (for instance, “I’m
worthless”), but shame may not be identified as the root of these
inner experiences. You simply believe you are worthless, rather
than being able to say, “I am feeling ashamed.” Particular
dissociative parts that are stuck in this pattern (attack self) are often
one side of a coin. The other side is comprised of inner parts that
engage in inner criticism, belittlement, and threats.
Attack Other
In this script, you, or a dissociative part of yourself, typically do not
feel negative toward yourself, but toward other people. You are not
the problem: They are. For example, a person who felt ashamed in
therapy might make an intentional comment that could be hurtful or
shameful to the therapist. Or a dissociative part may be viciously
critical of other parts internally. The experience is negative, and the
feeling is one of anger or contempt of the other person (or other
parts). Anger is directed away from the self, perhaps toward the
source of the shaming event. Thoughts include an awareness of
someone else’s (perhaps another part’s) actions or faults, and they
may or may not involve awareness of shame. The motivation is to

improve your own self-image by externalizing the shame and
perhaps projecting it onto someone else (or some other part). The
behavior is a verbal or physical attack to make the other person feel
inferior and yourself superior and stronger. Very angry parts may
engage in this kind of strategy, always blaming and shaming other
parts, or people in the world, unaware of their own shame.
Withdrawal From Others (Isolation)
In this script, you or a dissociative part of you accepts the message
of shame as real (“I am such a loser”) and feels badly about it. You
feel so bad that you isolate yourself from others so you do not
expose yourself to further shaming experiences. For example, a
person who feels ashamed while working on the skills in this
manual might consider dropping out of group or individual therapy
to avoid the shameful feelings. A strong feeling of anger and
anxiety may accompany the shameful withdrawal and isolation.
Thoughts include a hyperawareness of discomfort with others,
imagining other people’s negative reactions (“Now, she is really a
loser!”), and a heightened awareness of shameful actions, faults, or
characteristics. Nevertheless, as in the attack self script, negative
feelings and cognitions may not be identified consciously as shame
based. The motivation is to limit shameful exposure by avoiding
other people or situations in which shame might be evoked. Some
dissociative parts may have strong urges to avoid social situations
or new experiences for this reason, and you might be filled with
dread each time you must be with others, or whenever you must try
something new at which there is potential for failure.
Avoidance of Inner Experience
A person (or dissociative part) may avoid being aware of inner
experiences such as feelings or thoughts that might evoke shame.
Thus, he or she is not aware of the experience of shame, typically
does not acknowledge the negative experience of self, engages in
denial, and attempts to distract self and others away from the
painful feeling. For example, a person who felt ashamed in therapy
might start making jokes or flippantly comment that the session is
boring or useless, or he or she might try to change the subject
entirely or even switch to another part that has a different agenda.
The experience becomes neutral or positive; shame may be
disowned or denied, or overridden with joy or excitement in

distracting activities (joking around, talking about something else).
There is little to no awareness of shame or one’s shameful actions,
faults, or characteristics. The motivation is to minimize the
conscious experience of shame or to prove that one does not feel
shame. Avoidance strategies are most likely to operate outside of
conscious awareness. Particular dissociative parts may be
especially adept at distracting from shame by changing the subject
or by being willing only to talk about silly, mundane topics.
Shame and guilt are pervasive in those who have been
traumatized. They are painful and difficult emotions to experience
and resolve. It will take time for you to deal with them more
constructively. In this manual, in your individual therapy, and in
your daily life, you will need to pay regular attention to shame-
related issues, gradually shifting perceptions, beliefs, and feelings
associated with guilt and shame.
Understanding Guilt
As with shame, it is important for you to distinguish between
adaptive guilt and guilt that is pervasive and unreasonable. In the
case of adaptive guilt, you have done something that society or
your own conscience judges as wrong, that is, you have a “guilty
conscience.” This kind of guilt is remedied when you recognize and
take responsibility for your behavior and change it going forward.
Guilt often implies that you had a choice about your actions. Yet
traumatized individuals have not done anything wrong to cause
abuse and were in no position to make choices about what
happened to them or what they did as children. And even when
they have engaged in unacceptable behavior and did have a choice,
they seem unable to eventually learn from it and let it go. Thus,
feelings of guilt are often unrealistic or inappropriate in people who
were abused as children. Even though they may believe the abuse
was their fault, they have no idea of what could have been different,
just that traumatizing events would not have occurred if only they
had been different in some undefined way. This appraisal is not
based on realistic facts or on what would be expected from other
people in the same situation. It does, however, provide the helpless
child with an internal sense of control to believe that “I could have
changed it, if only I fought harder, or ran faster, or stood up to
him.”

Tips for Coping With Shame and Guilt
To resolve pervasive shame and guilt, you will find it helpful to
learn more adaptive ways of coping instead of using the shame
scripts described in the previous section.
• Recognize shame and guilt reactions, and name them. Learn
your typical thoughts and feelings that are shame based. For
example, you, or some part of you, might often say, “I could
never do that; I would fail, so I won’t even try.” That fear of
failure is shame based. Or you often compare yourself with
others and always come out “less than.” If you believe that
other people are always smarter, kinder, work harder, are
more efficient, and are better at relationships than you are,
then you likely are shame based. And the reverse is also true:
If you always view yourself as superior to others, you are
also likely to have a lot of shame.
• Learn your patterns of coping with shame, that is, how you
use shame scripts. Do you mentally attack yourself, or do you
tend to attack others? Do you avoid situations, thoughts,
feelings, and memories that might evoke shame? Do you
isolate and withdraw from others? Each part of you may have
used a different shame script to cope with shame.
• Recall how often you tend to feel shame on a scale of 1–5,
with 1 being never or rarely, and 5 being every day or almost
all the time. This scale will help you determine how much
and what sort of work to focus on to cope with your shame.
• Notice what body sensations you have when you feel
ashamed or guilty. Are they different for shame and guilt?
• Once you notice your patterns, try to interrupt or shift them.
You may find you need to practice this in small steps. For
example, wait a short while to engage in attacking yourself or
someone else instead of immediately doing it. Then try
changing small aspects, for example, remind yourself that
you are experiencing shame and that criticizing yourself will
only make it worse.
• Ascertain which cognitions you might need to correct, for
example, “I am worthless. I don’t deserve to have good
things. People find me disgusting.” Find possible
counterarguments, such as, “No one is completely worthless;

each person has some merit.” “Having good things is not
about deserving them. It is part of life to have good things.”
“There are people in my life that do not find me disgusting.”
• Notice specific beliefs related to shame and guilt that may be
held in particular dissociative parts of yourself.
• Recognize and begin to work with the strategies employed by
other parts of yourself. Try creating dialogues about shame
and about what all parts want to accomplish with those
strategies. For example, respond to critical parts of yourself
by saying, “I know you have my best interests at heart, that
you want me to be competent, successful, and well liked. I
want that too. Shouting at me or ridiculing me only makes me
lose what little confidence I can muster. Let’s work together
to find a different way that is more effective.” And to a very
shameful part, you might say, “I know that shame is an awful
feeling and I am going to help you with it. I know you feel
ashamed about what happened to you, and I want you to
know that it wasn’t your fault and that there is a way we can
deal with this together. I am glad to listen to what you have
to say, whenever you feel ready. I’d like to point out what is
different in the present from the past, so you can feel more at
ease.”
• Be willing to talk about shame in therapy. You can begin by
just talking about what it is and how it affects you, rather
than talking about particular shameful events. Practice
talking about it until you become more comfortable with the
topic and know your therapist can talk about it, too. Help all
parts of yourself learn to talk about it in therapy.
• Notice your present experience, and whenever shame or guilt
is evoked, ground yourself in the present, remind yourself
that much of what you believe about yourself when you feel
shameful or guilty is greatly exaggerated and not valid.
• Work with your body to shift your physical experience of
shame. For example, if you feel frozen, try to move around a
little bit, take in some breaths, and squeeze your toes in your
shoes.
• Gradually share with yourself, among all parts of yourself,
and with your therapist the events in your life that bring so
much shame to you. When shame is shared in the presence of
an accepting other, it is most likely to resolve. You may not

be ready to do this yet: That is fine. This is just a reminder to
do so when you are ready. The timing should be discussed
with your therapist.
• Shame is typically alleviated when you can develop a
positive or joyful experience to pair with the shameful one.
For example, if you feel “unworthy,” recall or imagine a
moment when you felt cared for by another person. Or if you
feel like a failure, recall or imagine a time when you felt
good or proud of something you had done, for example,
when you made a good grade in school, learned how to use a
computer program, finished a project that was difficult to
complete, or were able to make a change in therapy.
• Chronic guilt is best managed by developing increasing
empathy for yourself and all parts of you. It is also helpful to
begin to realize (with help from your therapist and others)
that some of your guilt may not be realistic. The more
empathy you develop, and the more you can fully realize the
true circumstances about which you experience chronic guilt,
the less you will feel.
• Realistic guilt is best managed by (1) accepting that you are
fallible and make mistakes and do not always behave
perfectly just like everyone else; (2) making a realistic
appraisal of what you have actually done (or not done) (this
may require the help of a safe other); (3) helping all parts
inside come to an inner acceptance in which the offending
behavior can be fairly judged but also the human being that
you are can be understood and accepted; (4) making amends
or restitution if possible; and (5) learning from your behavior
so you can do things differently in the future.

Homework Sheet 24.1
Coping With Shame
1. Event: Describe an event or situation in the present in which you
felt shame (ask for all parts to cooperate as much as possible in this
exercise to select a situation that will not feel too overwhelming to
you.)
2. List the thought(s) or beliefs you or other parts had during the
event that indicated that you were feeling ashamed.
3. Describe the physical sensations that you or other parts of you
experienced when you were feeling ashamed (cold, shaking, frozen,
collapsed, holding your breath, feeling shut down, tingly, rigid,
butterflies in your stomach, etc.).
4. If you are aware of them, list specific triggers that evoke your
shame.
5. As best you can, list which of the four shame scripts that you or
other parts of yourself tend to use and how they manifested in the
situation you described above (attack self, attack other,
withdrawal/isolation, and avoidance of inner experience).
6. Can you recall or imagine having a sense of pride, achievement,
or accomplishment in a similar situation to the one you describe
above? (For example, if you described a situation in which you felt
ashamed because you made a mistake, can you recall or imagine a
time when you did something well and felt good about it, or
someone told you that you did a great job?). If so, take the time to
help all parts of you remember or imagine that experience. Notice
your thoughts, feelings, and body sensations.

7. Now, make a list of some experiences in which you felt a healthy
sense of pride, achievement, or accomplishment. Help all parts
reflect on this list often.

Homework Sheet 24.2
Coping With Guilt
1. Event: Describe an event or situation in which you felt guilty
(again, be careful to choose a situation that is not overwhelming to
you or any part of you).
2. List the thought(s) or beliefs you or other parts had during the
event that indicated that you were feeling guilty.
3. Describe the physical sensations that you or other parts of you
experienced when you were feeling guilty (cold, shaking, frozen,
collapsed, holding your breath, feeling shut down, tingly, rigid,
butterflies in your stomach, etc.).
4. If you are aware, list specific triggers that evoke guilt.
5. How do you or other parts of you tend to cope with feeling
guilty? For example, do you withdraw from others, berate yourself
or other parts internally, avoid thinking about it, cannot stop
thinking about it, or want to hurt yourself?
6. Describe some ways in which you could approach chronic guilt
more constructively. For example, instead of being in it, you could
reflect on your experience of guilt and challenge some of your core
beliefs.

CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
Coping With the Needs of Inner Child
Parts
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: Coping With the Needs of Inner Child Parts
Introduction
Understanding Young Parts of Yourself
Goals of Working With Young Parts
Working With Young Parts
Blending: An Advanced Technique
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 25.1, Working With Inner
Child Parts of Yourself.
Complete Homework Sheet 25.2, Practice Review:
Using Inner Cooperation to Solve Problems in Daily
Life.
If appropriate, practice various forms of blending.
Consult with your therapist first.
Introduction
Almost all people with a complex dissociative disorder experience
at least one dissociative part of themselves that seems young or
childlike. This is natural, given that people with this type of
disorder usually were traumatized at an early age: These parts
represent the developmental steps they missed or did not

completely achieve. Of course, these parts are not actual children,
and they must be dealt with in the context of a person’s adult life in
a responsible manner. In this chapter you will learn specific ways to
increase your acceptance of and cooperation with these “young”
parts of yourself.
Understanding Young Parts of Yourself
Some parts of you may experience themselves as adolescents,
children, or even toddlers or infants. These parts are stuck in
various early developmental time periods of the past, having been
banished from your awareness or avoided because you may have
lacked empathy and a willingness to deal with them. The ages of
dissociative child parts often seem to correlate with particularly
traumatizing times in your childhood.
Dissociative parts that experience themselves as children often
perceive, think, feel, speak, and behave more or less in the ways in
which a child might. To a great extent, their behaviors, thoughts,
feelings, needs, and wishes are your strivings to achieve the normal
developmental experiences from your childhood that you missed,
particularly regarding attachment with a caring person.
The Experience of Child Parts
Your experiences of these parts may include hearing voices crying
or screaming, begging for help, or asking for activities or objects
that a child might enjoy or find comforting (but an adult might not).
You may feel intense urges that a child might naturally have, such
as wanting to buy a doll in a store, eating dessert instead of dinner,
or wishing your therapist could adopt you. At times, a young part
might influence or even control your behavior. For example, you
might find yourself hiding in the closet or a corner, whimpering
like a child; talking in a young voice; or even suddenly being
unable to understand a more “adult” vocabulary. These experiences
might frighten, shame, or disgust you and other parts of yourself.
Child parts typically hold traumatic memories, especially of
fear, shame, anger, loneliness, and yearning for love, a major
reason why you might have avoided them. But occasionally they
may have positive memories, either real or fantasized, as though
they have kept good memories safe for you, or they long ago
retreated into a wonderful fantasy world to escape the pain of real

life.
Phobic Avoidance of Child Parts
You may have developed a strong phobic avoidance of most of
these parts of yourself and the experiences they contain. You, or
other parts of you, may find the needs and desires of young parts
shameful or disgusting, or exhausting and overwhelming. Perhaps
aggressive parts of you criticize these parts as being ridiculous,
silly, stupid, childish, and so forth, and try to convince you to
ignore or even “get rid of” them. However, avoiding or ignoring
these parts of you will only perpetuate their inner experiences of
loneliness, yearning, need, shame, and fear. As Marilyn Van
Derbur (2004) wrote about a young part of herself:
Instead of gratitude for sacrificing herself, I loathed, despised,
and blamed her . . . she was profoundly vulnerable, completely
alone, trapped and scared. (p. 191) . . . Only when I could
begin to understand how I really was as a child, could I ever
begin to have compassion for the one I hated most, the night
child. My perception of her had to change or I would never be
able to find a resolution. (p. 242)
When you, and other parts of you, can actively acknowledge,
accept, and empathize with young parts of yourself, you will begin
to feel more inner relief. You can find ways to help these parts of
you that are stuck in the painful wounds of childhood to begin to
have more positive experiences. You can take their needs and
wishes into account respectfully, even if you cannot always meet
those needs in exactly the way that is wished. The point is to take
these parts of yourself seriously and take the time to know more
about them without judging them as bad or negative.
Problems Related to Switching to Young Parts in Daily Life
Spontaneously switching to a child part in daily life typically
occurs when an adult is unable or too afraid or ashamed to cope
with a certain situation. Some individuals may switch to a child part
as an unconscious avoidance strategy, for example, to avoid a
conflict, such as a disagreement with an angry partner, or to deflect
attention away from a significant but painful issue in therapy. Other
times, switching to a child part is a maladaptive needs-meeting
strategy, for example, to gain support or comfort for which the

adult is unable or unwilling to ask another person. In these cases,
work to help an adult part(s) learn to be assertive and less avoidant
is essential.
In the same way that it is not appropriate for real children to be
responsible for adult functions in life, young parts should not be in
charge of your behavior or be left to cope on their own with daily
life without adult parts of you in charge. They should, when
possible and appropriate, be present by looking through the eyes of
the adult or a temporary blending (see later discussion) (Fine &
Comstock, 1989; Kluft, 2003), because it is essential that all parts
of you learn to be present. The limited ways of coping and fixation
in trauma-time of young parts can result in poor decision making
(see chapter 27 on decision making) and problems in relationships
with others. It is thus important to learn to prevent switching to
younger parts, particularly when you are around other people,
because they may not understand or, worse, may take advantage of
you when you are too vulnerable. You may choose to allow some
time for these younger parts to be out in private for specific
activities that have healing goals. But such experiences should be
guided by an adult part of you in order to help these parts continue
with their growth and development toward adulthood as parts of
you as a whole person.
Goals of Working With Young Parts
Every person with a dissociative disorder is different and finds his
or her own ways of healing. When you are reflecting on ways to
help young parts of you, as with all parts of you, it is helpful to be
clear about the goals of what you are trying to accomplish. For
instance, if a child part wants to color in a coloring book or call
your therapist, it is important to consider the goal(s) of that activity
for you as a whole person, as well as how appropriate it may be
given relational boundaries or social acceptableness.
For example, does a particular activity help parts of you know
that you are allowed to have fun or that you can give yourself a
simple pleasure or comfort? Does it help young parts feel more
accepted by you and willing to grow and develop, knowing you can
meet your needs as a whole person, or does it reinforce their desire
to remain childlike and never grow up? Does it help critical parts
learn that treating child parts more supportively and empathically is

helpful, or does it increase their shame and rage at “childish
needs?” Does it support further avoidance of necessary but painful
inner grief work by child parts (and you), or does it offer a greater
sense of your adult presence to help them tackle difficult issues?
Does it soothe and calm parts so that they do not disrupt your daily
living, or does it encourage parts of you to become more
demanding of “special” separate attention and time? These are
some of the important considerations for you and your therapist to
take into account when deciding how best to help young parts of
yourself.
One reason some child parts remain separate from you is the
strong wish to ignore what has happened and to create a loving,
wonderful childhood in the present, as though nothing bad had
happened. Therefore, a major goal is to find an appropriate balance
between the necessary acceptance of and grieving for what you did
not get as a child and discovering ways to fill some of those needs
in the present. It is not possible to undo what has already been
done. It is possible to grieve and move forward to rewarding
experiences in the present and the future.
In addition to working toward healing goals for young parts of
you, you need to simultaneously balance what is helpful for you as
an adult and as a whole person. For example, if a young part wants
to take a stuffed animal in hand while you shop at the grocery store,
even though that may help that part of you feel more secure, it is
not appropriate for you as an adult to do so, and it may not help
other parts at all. Moreover, it supports the young part in continuing
to be unaware of present-day reality, namely, that you are an adult
and that the grocery store is a safe place. In such cases, you might
compromise, for instance, by putting a small object in your purse or
pocket that represents safety and comfort for that young part. Or
perhaps that part might feel safer by looking through the eyes of an
adult part who will ensure their well-being or stay in an inner safe
place.
Do not be afraid to be creative. As with every interaction with
parts of yourself, you must weigh the benefits and risks for all parts
of yourself, finding a balance that is acceptable for all parts of you
in the context of being an adult in the present. We suggest that you
discuss with your therapist the ways that are most effective for you
in accomplishing progress toward healing.
As we have noted, young parts of you are not literal children.

However, you may use much of what you know about children’s
growth and development in planning to help these parts of you.
Next we will discuss several strategies to do so.
Working With Young Parts
Before you begin specific work with child parts, it is essential to
examine your attitude toward these parts with your therapist. Child
parts most often remain separate because the adult part(s) of you is
avoidant of what they represent. As you work with child parts, it is
equally important to help adult parts of you to be more empathic
and accepting of the needs, wishes, and feelings of young parts.
Already, in using this manual and in your therapy, you have had
opportunities to practice skills that will help you cope with young
parts of yourself:
• Reflecting, including paying attention to and listening
respectfully to parts of yourself, as well as becoming more
aware of and more ac-cepting all of your inner experiences
that you previously ignored or avoided
• Communicating with parts of yourself through inner dialogue
or journaling
• Talking inwardly to other parts to reassure, comfort, and
soothe
• Developing a safe inner place for all parts of yourself
• Using imagery and other relaxation techniques to help all
parts of you
• Orienting to the present those dissociative parts that are stuck
in trauma-time
• Understanding and challenging dysfunctional core beliefs of
dissociative parts
• Creating an inner meeting place and having inner
deliberations about daily life
As with any parts of yourself, you may work with child parts
using four different strategies: (1) imagery-based inner experiences,
such as safe places and imagined activities; (2) inner cooperation
among parts to care for each other; (3) actual experiences that meet
a specific young developmental need, such as having a nightlight
on during the night; and (4) actual present-day experiences that

simultaneously meet the needs of all parts, such as going to the zoo
or taking a pleasant walk for enjoyment.
Many people find imagery helpful in working with young (as
well as other) parts. You might imagine caring for young parts
inside in the same way as you might a literal child. For example,
perhaps you might imagine holding or rocking an upset part;
teaching a part what it needs to know to grow and develop; or
creating an inner space where a part can play freely and feel safe.
There are no limits on how you can use your creativity and
empathic intentions to help parts of yourself heal by using imagery.
You may find many additional helpful suggestions from a method
called Developmental Needs Meeting Strategy (Schmidt, 2009). Of
course, you should always check with your therapist before you try
any suggestions you may find on your own to make sure they are
right for you.
As an extension of imagery work, various parts of yourself can
participate internally in caring for child parts. Some people already
have parts that are helping internally, perhaps including some
mutually trusting relationships between “younger” and “older”
parts. Other people may need the help of their therapist to
accomplish this step, especially if they are strongly avoidant of
dealing with parts of themselves. For example, a part may “babysit”
while you tend to adult responsibilities, or various parts can
comfort and orient young parts.
Some people find it useful to allow young parts of themselves
private time in which they can engage in actual child’s play, for
example, coloring in a coloring book or reading a children’s book,
allowing themselves simple pleasures they did not have previously.
Others find it more helpful to imagine offering these activities
internally, without the need to actually do them. Still others may
find ways in adult daily life to include child parts in adult activities,
for example, going on a special excursion that is fun for you as a
whole person. Perhaps it might be helpful to establish a comforting
bedtime routine for young parts, for example, reading a nice story
or having a stuffed animal or other comfort object or music
available.
And of course, some people might not find these interventions
helpful at all. The point is not to revert back to childhood or to treat
these parts as literal children. Rather, the goal is to learn how to
give yourself what you need to develop and heal and, most

important, to create a greater degree of empathy and connection
between you and these young parts of yourself.
Working With Nonverbal Parts
Young parts, and perhaps some other parts as well, are often not
very verbal, and thus may have a hard time expressing themselves
in therapy. You might allow other nonverbal communications from
young parts, such as drawings, to be brought to therapy. Some parts
even seem like infants who cannot speak. Fortunately, most people
are able to discern what infants need without language. You can
help by making an effort to understand the nonverbal behaviors of
young parts of yourself, for example, responding to their crying by
comforting them. You may also learn to speak for young parts,
much as a parent speaks on behalf of a young child to support
language development, for example, “You need comfort. Let me
hold you”; “You are cold. Let me warm you up”; or “You are so
hungry! I will feed you.” A more advanced imagery technique is to
help the young part “grow up” to an age at which language is
possible. Your therapist can likely help you with these
interventions.
Blending: An Advanced Technique
As you develop more empathy and care for young parts (or any
parts), you may find it helpful to experience a greater closeness
among particular parts of yourself. Blending is a temporary coming
together of parts for the purposes of enriching the experience of one
or more parts (Fine & Comstock, 1989; Kluft, 1982, 2003). Several
cautions are important to understand before you try any form of
blending. First, be sure to consult with your therapist to determine
whether this technique is right for you at this time. Second,
blending should be voluntary for all parts involved, not forced, and
an agreement made that it will immediately end at the request of
any part of you involved. Finally, during the period of blending, as
we describe it here, traumatic memories, feelings, or sensations are
not to be shared. There may be times when blending can support
work on traumatic memories, but that is not what you are learning
at this time. The focus should only be on present-day experience. If
you are unable to practice blending without the intrusion of
traumatic material, you should refrain from using this technique for

the time being and consult your therapist for further help.
Blending can occur in small steps, according to your own pace.
The parts that you may want to blend together should not have
major conflicts between them, and be focused on the present not the
past.
For example, you can invite a child part (or again, any part) to
“come closer” to you so that part can have a more complete sensory
experience of the present. First, you might simply allow both of
you just to become accustomed to being closer. If this does not yet
feel sufficiently safe, you could invite parts to keep a safe distance,
but look through special glasses or binoculars, or through a
protective window to be able to see the present more clearly. As
they begin to experience a current situation “through your eyes,”
that is, from your adult perspective, their anxious feelings based on
the past can be reduced.
If your level of inner closeness feels safe and even positive, you
can take another small step to become even closer. Perhaps it
involves reaching out and touching together the tips of each other’s
index fingers, as in the movie E.T.: The Extra-Terrestrial, or
holding hands, or inviting the child part to sit in your lap, or
wrapping up together in a comfortable and safe quilt. Take your
time to find the right image for you, and then determine whether
this level of inner closeness is acceptable to all parts. If so, you may
continue to the next step.
As you and a young part are safely close, encourage her to look
out of your eyes, listen through your ears, and feel with your hands.
For a short while, you and the child part of yourself are sharing the
same experience in the present instead of having different
experiences. During this sharing, you can point out the differences
of the present that exist alongside some similarities to the past.
A more complete blending occurs when you and another part
come completely together for a short period of time. This type of
blending is not only for orienting parts to the present, but to help
you complete tasks more effectively. For example, several parts of
you may merge to function better at work, or to make a plan for
safety, or to help other parts internally.
Blending is a precursor to all parts becoming you as one whole
person—a major goal of therapy. Many people with a complex
dissociative disorder are afraid of having all parts of themselves
come together (that is, to integrate), fearing parts will die,

disappear, or “be killed off.” Blending can offer positive temporary
experiences within your control that help you understand more
about what integration is like, reducing the fear of all parts of you
over time.
To blend completely, you might use an image that works best
for you. Perhaps you might imagine one part stepping in the shoes
of another, or hugging until you are merged, or standing in a beam
of warm light that helps you merge, or blending in a healing pool of
water. You may also try to imagine one part standing in front of the
other, both facing forward. The part in front steps back just as the
other part steps forward. They meet in the middle and merge. There
are infinite images you can use for yourself: Choose the one(s) that
is right for you.
If you would like, you can try blending for just a moment to see
what it is like, and then move away from each other and discuss
your experience. Some people have strange physical sensations at
first; for example, when blending with a child they feel very short
or very tall (depending on which part has the perspective). Some
feel wiser, stronger, or just different in a way they cannot explain.
Some (but not all) find they have temporary changes in visual or
auditory acuity. These are expected sensations and will pass after a
brief time. In the beginning, you and other parts may find it helpful
to know you can blend and unblend at will, so you will not fear a
forced integration. You may set a time frame for blending, for
example, 1, 2, or 5 minutes at first during a therapy session, and if
that goes well, you can practice at home each day. As you are
ready, blending can occur as you need it. You may even find that
blending is such a positive experience that you prefer to remain
blended together. Just make sure you are going at your own pace,
taking into account the needs and concerns of all parts of you.

Homework Sheet 25.1
Working With Inner Child Parts of Yourself
1. Describe your attitude and the attitude of other parts (if any)
toward an inner child part; for example, do you feel protective,
angry, ashamed, critical, loving, disgusted, exhausted, or helpful?
2. Describe a young part’s attitude toward you and other parts of
yourself, if you are aware. For example, perhaps this part feels
afraid, needy, angry, distrustful, loving, or helpful.
3. Given the attitudes you described in #1 and #2 above, describe
any inner conflicts about accepting and working empathically with
child parts of yourself.
4. Imagine that your attitudes and reactions to young part(s) of
yourself were the same as those you might have to an actual child.
What might be different in your approach to your inner child
part(s)? For example, would you be more patient, more interested,
more caring, or offer more nurturing limits?
5. Describe any difficulties you experience from child parts, for
example, hearing inner crying, having flashbacks, feeling a
desperate need for attention and comfort, or interference with daily
life.
6. Either during a therapy session or during a private time, practice
helping a child part of yourself to experience the present more fully
by looking out of your eyes, hearing with your ears, feeling with
your hands. Explore your surroundings with this child part, talking
inwardly to reassure, comfort, and orient. Describe your experience
of this exercise below, or if you were unable to complete the
exercise, describe what stopped you.

7. List up to five ways you can meet the needs of your child part(s)
in ways upon which all parts can agree and which are appropriate in
the present. Refer back to the chapter for suggestions, if needed.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Homework Sheet 25.2
Practice Review: Using Inner Cooperation to Solve
Problems in Daily Life
This exercise is not specifically about young parts of yourself, but
rather is a skills review for inner cooperation.
1. Describe areas of daily life in which you and your parts have
achieved (a degree of) cooperation.
2. In which areas would you and other parts like to achieve more
cooperation?
3. Which methods of inner communication seem to be most helpful
for you?
Inner dialogue among parts
Writing/journaling
Inner meetings with parts
Blending
Other (please describe)
Give an example of using one of these methods of inner
communication.
4. What do you or parts of yourself do to calm, comfort, and orient
parts stuck in trauma-time, including child parts?
5. If you have continued difficulties with inner communication and
cooperation, describe the reasons (for example, you feel too much
fear; you avoid taking time to do it; parts refuse to cooperate; you
do not feel empathy for other parts; or a part of you is highly
critical, so you stop trying). Make sure you discuss these
difficulties with your therapist.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
Coping With Self-Harm
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: Coping With Self-Harm
Introduction
Understanding Self-Harm
Motivations for Self-Harm
Helping Dissociative Parts Involved With Self-Harm
Tips for Alleviating Self-Harm
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 26.1, Understanding More
About Your Self-Harm.
Homework Sheet 26.2, Working With a Dissociative
Part That Engages in Self-Harm.
Introduction
Self-harm behaviors are coping strategies involving injury to the
body that people employ when they do not have sufficient skills to
cope in more adaptive ways. Many traumatized people use self-
harm as a way of coping with overwhelming inner experiences;
thus, the behavior is often related to the phobia of inner experience.
In this chapter you will learn more about self-harm, how it affects
all parts of you, and new ways to manage it more effectively.
Understanding Self-Harm

Self-harm is deliberate injury to your body in order to cope with
stress and inner conflict and pain. It can be understood as a
substitute action for more adaptive coping that attempts to deal with
a variety of overwhelming problems, many involving too much
feeling (for example, loneliness, abandonment, panic, inner
conflicts, traumatic memories) or too little feeling (numbness,
depersonalization, emptiness, feeling dead). Self-harm is thus often
related to the need for regulation skills, that is, finding ways to
modulate and tolerate unbearable inner experiences, such as painful
emotions, or traumatic memories (Gratz & Walsh, 2009; Miller,
1994). Some people harm themselves in secret and carefully hide
the inflicted wounds from others. Other people harm their bodies in
places that are visible to people around them. For these latter
individuals self-harm may be, in part, a way to communicate and
express their pain to others because they are unable to say it with
words. Some people hurt themselves because they hear inner
voice(s) that command them to do so.
Generally, most people feel quite ashamed of self-harm
behaviors and find the experience difficult to discuss. They may not
mention it in therapy unless they are specifically asked in a
nonjudgmental manner. People who self-harm do not intend to kill
themselves, and in fact, self-harm may relieve extreme suicidal
thoughts for some individuals. Self-harm is a strong signal that you
are suffering greatly and that you need help to cope more
effectively. Even though self-harm may be temporarily relieving, it
inevitably results in an ongoing need to hurt yourself until you are
better able to reflect on what is driving this behavior. Then you can
make attempts to regulate your emotions and impulses and help
parts of you become more grounded in the present.
Self-harming behavior may originate with certain parts of the
personality that may or may not yet be very accessible to you.
Amnesia is quite common before, during, or after self-harm, so
people may find they are injured yet not be aware they have done it
to themselves; or perhaps they watch themselves from a distance
and cannot seem to control what they are doing (Coons & Milstein,
1990). Parts that self-harm are often reviled and avoided by other
parts of self. Inner conflicts among dissociative parts often evoke a
tendency to self-harm as a solution to ease the tension of the
conflict without resolving it.

Types of Self-Harm
There are different ways to self-injure, ranging from the inflicting
mild discomfort or pain with no physical evidence of harm, to
severe injury resulting in the need for emergency medical care.
Some people feel pain during or after self-harm, while others feel
none because they are numb. One may inflict injury intentionally to
one’s body, for example, by cutting or head banging. A more
indirect way to self-harm is to neglect one’s body or endanger
one’s health through severe substance abuse, eating problems,
failure to see a doctor when necessary, and inattention that causes
frequent accidents, such as falls, kitchen burns, or auto accidents.
Also, many people harm themselves by engaging in risky behaviors
that could lead to serious physical harm, for example, reckless
driving, unprotected sex, going to unsafe places alone or at night, or
choosing to be with unsafe people. Some self-harm is very
impulsive, while other times it is planned, calculated, and involves
a specific routine.
Motivations for Self-Harm
Each person has his or her own unique reasons for engaging in self-
destructive behaviors. And various dissociative parts of a person
may have different reasons for self-harm. Once you understand
your own motivations to engage in self-harm, you are a step closer
to learning how to relieve your pain or conflict in a more helpful
manner. Following are some common reasons why traumatized
individuals might engage in self-harming behaviors.
• To feel real or alive when one is depersonalized or extremely
numb
• To evoke emotional numbness in order to stop feeling too
much
• To relieve overwhelming emotions, tension, or traumatic
memories
• To make the “outside” (body) more congruent with the
“inside” (emotional) pain
• To refocus inner emotional pain to the outside, to localize it
• To express anger or aggression toward self (self-hatred)
• As a substitute for expressing anger or aggression toward
others

• To cope with abandonment, rejection, or loneliness
• To reduce shame or guilt
• To diminish feelings of emptiness, confusion, or inner chaos
• In response to internal command voices (from other
dissociative parts of self)
• To have control over inflicted pain (“I will hurt myself before
someone else can hurt me”)
• To garner attention from others
• To tell what has happened—as a traumatic reenactment
(some part of the body is injured in a similar way as it was
during a traumatizing event)
• One dissociative part may be punishing or attempting to kill
another
• Punishment for “telling secrets” (one part punishes another
part through self-harm for talking about traumatizing events)
• To prevent suicide, that is, an inner bargain for a lesser injury
instead of death
• To precipitate a switch from one part to another, or to prevent
a switch
• For some people, self-harm becomes addictive, because it
may release endorphins, which make them feel euphoric or
high.
Helping Dissociative Parts Involved With Self-Harm
People who have dissociative parts that engage in self-harm are
often very afraid and ashamed of the behaviors of those parts of
themselves. They may have little or no communication with these
parts. Thus, these parts are often isolated and feel criticized, feared,
and shamed. Often angry parts hurt or command other parts to hurt
themselves in reaction to specific internal or external triggers, for
example, telling the therapist about a traumatizing event that
needed to be kept secret, or a child part desperately seeking contact
with another person.
In fact, self-harm often results from an inner cycle of intense
conflicts that perpetuate dysregulated emotions. Needy, afraid,
vulnerable parts that are in pain evoke anger, fear, and disgust in
critical parts. These critical parts strike out internally, causing
fearful parts to become increasingly distressed; they also create
further inner avoidance of the critical parts, which become

increasingly feared, reviled, and isolated. Such dynamics lead to
increasingly overwhelming emotions, shame, and self-hatred,
which only intensify the risk of self-harm. This cycle is depicted in
Figure 26.1.
Tips for Alleviating Self-Harm
• If you have not shared with your therapist that you engage in
self-harm, it is imperative that you do so. The more support
and help you get, the more you will be able to learn adaptive
strategies to cope.
• Use your reflective skills (see chapter 6) to try to understand
which parts of yourself engage in self-harm and what their
motivations are. If you are hesitant or afraid, perhaps some
parts of yourself can help you with this task. Your therapist
can also help you.
• Try to develop some empathy for yourself and your parts by
realizing that self-harm is a way to deal with unbearable
experiences, and those parts of you that are engaging in this
behavior are in great emotional pain and need help.
• Take yourself and your body seriously. If you need to take
care of wounds from self-injury, please do so, and get
medical treatment if necessary. This may not be easy,
because some medical professionals do not understand why
people self-harm, and when the harm is severe, they may
mistake it for suicidal behavior. You may need to take special
care to find health professionals who will help rather than
judge you.
• Realize that each part of you that engages in self-harm may
potentially have different reasons for doing so. You may
need to help one part at a time with different ways of coping.
• Usually parts inside want contact with you and your therapist;
they want to break out of their isolation and self-harm
behaviors. However, they are afraid of judgment and need to
be assured that you are really willing to help. So there is a
double phobia to overcome: You must overcome your fear
and shame toward parts of you that self-harm, and they must
do the same toward you. Often, self-harm diminishes already
as you are more willing to accept and understand these inner

parts of yourself.
• Notice what triggers parts of you to engage in self-harm (for
example, memories, relationship conflicts, feeling alone,
overwhelming anger, shame, or sadness). Once you become
more aware, you can use some of the tools in chapter 15 to
minimize and manage triggers.
• Use the skills you learn in this manual to soothe or calm you
and all parts of you that have the urge to self-harm.
• Develop a plan to use constructive alternatives to self-harm
that fit for each part of you. For instance, if a part engages in
self-harm in reaction to a flashback, it is important to help
this part become more grounded and oriented to the present,
and to increasingly realize that those events are over. You
may need to communicate with this part to continue to help
with grounding and orienting to the present in potentially
triggering situations. By staying in contact through inner
communication and empathy, you can help this part to stay
present, feel more safe and comfortable, and thus feel fewer
urges to self-harm. If a part of you engages in self-harm
when you experience a perceived threat of abandonment or
rejection, you can help by exploring the core beliefs that
evoke overwhelming feelings, for example, “I am
unlovable”; “Everyone always leaves me”; “People don’t
really care about me”; “I will always be alone.”
• Finally, be patient: It is not always easy to find more
constructive ways to cope. Change and healing come one
small step at a time.

Figure 26.1. Cycle of Self-Harm

Homework Sheet 26.1
Understanding More About Your Self-Harm
The more you know about your self-harm, the more you will be
able to eliminate it. Use the set of questions below to help you
discover more about your need to self-harm. If any of these
questions are triggering, you should stop and use grounding and
relaxation exercises. Remember to go at your own pace.
1. How do you know when you need to self-harm? For example, “I
feel alone and hopeless”; “I have a fight with my partner”; “I feel
ashamed.”
2. About how long do your episodes of self-harm last? Seconds?
Minutes? Hours? How frequent are they? Daily? Weekly?
Monthly? Only occasionally?
3. How do know when you can stop an episode of self-harm? For
example, “I start feeling real again”; “I feel a release of tension”;
“I come to and realize I have been hurting myself”; “When I make
five cuts.”
4. Describe the circumstances in which you would most likely self-
harm. For example, when alone; at night; on the weekend, after a
fight with someone; when you are very stressed; or when you have
flashbacks.
5. Where are you most likely to engage in self-harm (for example,
at home, in the bathroom or bedroom, in the car)? Does this
location have any special meaning to you?
6. Do you experience amnesia, physical numbness, watching
yourself, or other evidence of dissociation? Please describe any
symptoms of dissociation and whether these happened before,

during, or after self-harm episodes.
7. What do you typically do after you self-harm? For example, do
you sleep, eat, go out, watch TV, or cry?
8. What were your thoughts and core beliefs before, during, and
after the episode?
9. What were your emotions before, during, and after the episode?
10. What were your physical sensations before, during, and after
the episode?

Homework Sheet 26.2
Working With a Dissociative Part That Engages in Self-
Harm
1. Using the method of inner communication that works best for
you, try to establish a dialogue with a part of you that engages in
self-harm. Listen with empathy as that part describes the
motivations for self-harm, even if you do not agree. Describe your
experience of the inner communication, as well as anything new
that you learned about yourself and the tendency to self-harm.
2. List reasons why a part of you might engage in self-harm (review
the list of reasons for self-harm if needed).
3. Is it possible that this part of you is not very oriented to the
present, that is, lives in trauma-time? If so, use your skills to help
this part of you become more oriented and grounded in the present.
What was helpful in your attempts to orient this part, and why?
What was not helpful, and why?
4. Describe any triggers that might be activating you or a part of
you to think about or engage in self-harm.
5. Given what you understand about the reasons for self-harm and
its triggers, describe a coping skill that this part of you might use
instead of self-harm, for example, avoiding certain triggers, talking
to your therapist, providing for the needs of a part, or listening with
empathy to a part. Practice these coping skills several times a week
and describe your experience of using this skill.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
Improving Decision Making Through
Inner Cooperation
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: Improving Decision Making Through Inner
Cooperation
Introduction
Understanding Decision Making
Problems With Decision Making for People With a
Complex Dissociative Disorder
Improving Decision Making
Techniques for Making Effective Decisions
• Exercise: Creating an Inner Meeting Space for Decision
Making
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 27.1, Developing an Inner
Meeting Space.
Complete Homework Sheet 27.2, Using Decision-
Making Techniques.
Introduction
Decision making is fundamental to all of our actions. We make
decisions both implicitly and consciously. For most people, the
many small decisions of day-to-day living take little energy or
effort, such as what clothes to wear, what to eat for a meal, what

time to go to bed, or when to stop work and relax. These choices
are made on a kind of automatic, “subconscious” level and happen
(relatively) easily. Particularly difficult decisions tend to involve
complex and less than ideal choices, conflicting emotions or goals,
sacrifices and compromises, and sustained energy and focus.
However, some people, particularly many traumatized individuals,
find even the smallest decisions troublesome, much less the more
complex and important ones. The ability to make small decisions
quickly and easily, and the capacity to reflect and decide on more
complex decisions are both necessary skills for your healing. In this
chapter you will learn more about how to cooperate and resolve
inner conflicts with all parts of yourself toward the end of more
effective decision making in your daily life.
Understanding Decision Making
For our decisions to be adaptive, we must not only take into
account our immediate needs—which may or may not be
completely clear to us in the moment—we also have to consider the
potential consequences of our actions in the future. Thus, we tend
to base our decision making to a large degree on how we perceive
our choices in the moment, and on how we predict the possible
outcomes of the actions we decide to take. It is essential to plan for
the near and distant future by making good decisions in the present,
such as taking time to study now for an exam that is coming up in a
few weeks, or saving money now for retirement.
Imagine that you are tired but are reading a very interesting
book. You can decide to put the book down at a decent hour and
get enough sleep, which meets a longer term need for sufficient
rest; or you can continue reading the book into the wee hours,
which gives you immediate pleasure but leaves you exhausted the
next day. You may decide that finishing the book is a priority over
sleep and accept the consequence of being tired, as long as you can
still function. Or you may decide that a regular amount of sleep is
more important, because you feel irritable and unable to focus
when you are tired. What is most adaptive for you depends on how
often you skip sleep and how well you can function after not
sleeping enough. Staying up too late once in a while is usually not a
problem, whereas staying up late most nights is likely to disrupt
your sleep patterns and functioning in the day.

Now imagine another scenario: You have bills that are due
immediately and you are tired in the evening. You can opt to go to
bed early or watch TV, or you can push yourself a little to pay the
bills first and then rest. In this case, the most adaptive decision
might be to override your fatigue temporarily and pay the bills,
because the consequences of not paying them might be painful to
you, more so than missing an hour of sleep or relaxation. Even
better, instead of postponing such tasks until the last minute, it is
helpful to build in time to get them done so they are not left to the
last minute.
Some choices require us to think through and analyze the
options, while others are best made based on what we feel or need
in the moment (Lehrer, 2009), which is different from being
impulsive in our decision making. Decisions that involve novel
situations that we have never encountered require more reflection,
careful deliberation, and creativity. Familiar situations require less
reflection, because we often already know what to do.
Unfortunately, certain dissociative parts of a person often
reflexively make the same decisions in almost all situations,
influencing or controlling the decisions of the person. Such parts
often do not learn from experience; they act as though their
decisions are right without thinking and do not attend to cues that
contradict their conclusions.
Decision-making styles can sometimes be problematic. Some
people tend to make impulsive decisions based only on how they
feel in the moment, rarely stopping to think things through. Others
might dither and obsess, overthinking and not using their feelings
sufficiently. A flexible and moderate style is most helpful: using
your intuition when the situation is familiar and you have
successfully made decisions that helped in similar circumstances,
and using reflection and consideration of many options when the
situation is complex and novel (Lehrer, 2009).
Sometimes it may be hard to know whether to base our decision
making on our short- or long-term needs. Thinking through is
especially important for these kind of decisions. And even when we
make a quick decision in the moment, we need to be able to predict
with some accuracy the long-term effects of our actions. However,
wise decisions are often made by consciously learning much about
the various choices we face and then letting it sink in. Using our
intuition, so to speak, we let our subconscious mind work with it,

and we subsequently make a decision.
It is important to consider both your thoughts and your
emotions when making most decisions. Some people ignore their
feelings and act only on rational thoughts, while others might
ignore their thinking and decide based on what they feel. People
with dissociative disorders are especially prone to either avoiding
their emotions when making decisions, because they are too
overwhelming, or avoiding their thoughts and being very
impulsive, based on the emotion and desires of the moment.
Problems With Decision Making for People With a
Complex Dissociative Disorder
Individuals with a dissociative disorder typically have difficulties
making certain decisions due to inner conflicts among dissociative
parts of themselves (Van der Hart, 2009). Because various
dissociative parts have not yet learned to accept and consider the
needs of the person as a whole in a collaborative and empathic
manner, even simple choices of daily life can be fraught with
conflict, uncertainty, and confusion. Each part may want to make a
different decision than do other parts.
In fact, decision making is part of maintaining or resolving your
dissociative disorder. Whenever you decide to avoid or to
communicate with a dissociative part of yourself, you have made a
decision for which there are consequences. Whenever you decide to
skip or complete a difficult homework assignment, you have made
a decision that will affect all parts of yourself. In every chapter you
have learned about new choices, which require new decisions. For
example, in chapter 11 you learned more about making decisions
about how to manage your free time. In chapter 16 you learned
ways to make more effective decisions that help you get through
difficult times.
Decisions, especially major ones, most often need to involve all
parts of you, just as any person needs to make a decision based on
his or her whole self. But when you have dissociative parts of
yourself, you may have a greater tendency to avoid hard decisions,
find it more difficult to resolve inner conflicts about decisions, and
experience impulsive decisions from parts of yourself. You may
have experienced how difficult it is to take into account the
perspectives, judgments, preferences, needs, or goals of all parts of

yourself in making decisions in an area of your life, for example,
about what you eat, how you plan and organize your daily life, how
you manage relationships, or what you work on in your therapy.
In fact, regardless of whether you are aware, every dissociative
part of yourself influences your decisions in some manner, whether
through collaboration, fear, shame, anxiety, excitement, criticism,
or sabotage.
Dissociative Parts as “Decision-Making Centers”
Each dissociative part is a “decision-making center” that often may
involve different perceptions, wishes, needs, and goals than another
part of yourself. Many parts fulfill specific functions for you as a
whole person, and thus they view certain decisions from a limited
or rigid perspective or even find some decisions completely
irrelevant, outside the realm of their own area of interests. These
competing perspectives and goals can create inner chaos and
confusion. For example, in deciding whether to go out to eat with a
friend, a fearful part of yourself may not want to leave the house,
another wants to be with your friend, another does not trust people
in general, one dreads eating in public, and one is completely
disinterested, wanting to continue working on a project.
When parts of you are stuck in a rigid perspective, they
typically have trouble empathizing with the perspectives and goals
of other parts. For example, if a dissociative part is stuck in fear
and distrust, it may be hard to convince this part that trusting a
person would be helpful. And if child parts are crying and asking
for someone to comfort them, while other parts believe that
dependency is bad and dangerous, these latter parts will berate the
child parts and try to avoid or push the comforting person away.
The result is a painful and confusing approach-avoidance to the
same person.
Furthermore, even though many important decisions require
compromise with other people, many dissociative parts may not
have yet learned how to listen to, and deliberate and compromise
with, others. Reflecting and overcoming the phobia of inner
experience are essential to adaptive decision making, so it is crucial
for you to continue to work on those skills. And you may have
already been able to come to workable solutions in some areas of
your life, for example, some decisions are made by you as a whole
person, or you may have delegated certain decisions to particular

parts of yourself, which eliminates conflicts about decisions.
Time Pressure and Decision Making
Having to make decisions under time pressure is a stressful
challenge for most people, especially when the choices are difficult
(Mann & Tan, 1993). The need to choose quickly evokes anxiety or
panic, which results in a narrowed perception of options and an
insufficient, rather haphazard exploration of the information needed
for an adequate decision. The risk for harassed decision makers, as
people in such situations have been called (Wright, 1974), is that an
impulsive choice may be made that may not be in the individual’s
best interest.
People with a dissociative disorder are even more vulnerable to
time pressures. Some parts of you may feel a chronic sense of
urgency, so that even when decisions do not have to be made
immediately, they feel the need to do so. The stress of this inner
time pressure may urge them to make choices that have not been
thought through, and hurried courses of action are not always the
most adaptive. For example, a part that always feels harried and
overworked may impulsively cancel a therapy session in order to
get more work done, instead of working to resolve that extreme
feeling of pressure during a session.
Of course, there will always be situations in which you have to
decide immediately what to do. For example, while driving in
traffic, you make countless decisions to slow down or not, to stay
behind another car or pass it, to take one way or another to your
destination. In these kind of situations that demand immediate
decisions, you need an implicit (if not explicit) inner understanding
and agreement that only those parts of self that have the necessary
skills and sense of responsibility are to make such decisions.
Harried, pressured decisions often create a vicious cycle,
leading to an ever more harried lifestyle, with all parts becoming
overwhelmed by the consequences of poor decisions, and thus
prone to even more emotion-driven, impulsive decisions that take
the least effort.
Effects of Fear and Anxiety on Perception and Judgment
Fear and anxiety affect decision making in the direction of more
caution and risk aversion (Loewenstein, Weber, Hsee, & Welch
2001). Traumatized individuals pay more attention to cues of threat

than other experiences, and they interpret ambiguous stimuli and
situations as threatening (Eysenck, 1992), leading to more fear-
driven decisions. In people with a dissociative disorder, certain
parts are compelled to focus on the perception of danger. Living in
trauma-time, these dissociative parts immediately perceive the
present as being “just like” the past, and “emergency” emotions
such as fear, rage, or terror are immediately evoked, which compel
impulsive decisions to engage in defensive behaviors (freeze, flight,
fight, or collapse). When parts of you are triggered, more rational
and grounded parts may be overwhelmed and unable to make
effective decisions.
Improving Decision Making
One of the most effective ways to improve your decision-making
ability is to follow the guideline of “deal with it before it happens.”
In other words, try to imagine accurately the outcomes of making
(or not making) important decisions. For example, in chapter 12
you were asked to develop plans well ahead of time to deal with
difficult times or situations. Reflection on what you and all parts of
you need, and on the effect of your choices on each part of you and
on others, requires that you find adequate quiet time to think
through far in advance of the situation. This methodical approach
prevents the highly charged and maladaptive decision making that
can occur at the last minute when you are feeling anxious and
pressured.
Of course, inner communication, empathy, and cooperation are
the foundations for improved decision making. To become more
effective in decision making about the future (for example,
deciding on when and where you will take your vacation, or how
you will prepare for an upcoming doctor’s appointment, or for your
therapist’s temporary absence), you need to understand the ways in
which parts of you either work together or hamper your decisions.
You might consider the ways in which the limited and rigid
perceptions and beliefs of certain parts affect your choice of
options. You can explore how you can foster further inner
communication, cooperation, and negotiation in general, and
specifically regarding a given decision.
A basic attitude of mutual empathy for and understanding of
other parts’ positions, including needs and related goals, is essential

in resolving conflicts that make decisions difficult. Decision
making is often difficult because it is sometimes impossible to
satisfy all parts inside at the same time. Thus, it is essential to learn
to make inner compromises, for parts to tolerate a delay in getting
what they want, or to grieve for what they cannot have. In your
adult daily life you often have to make responsible decisions for
actions that some parts might experience as “boring” (for example,
paying bills instead of spending money of something fun),
threatening (such as going for a job interview where parts might
feel they are being judged), or otherwise unsatisfactory.
Once dissociative parts of yourself feel respected and heard by
you, they become more amenable to considering different
perspectives and compromises. And while the perspective of each
dissociative part needs to be taken into account, the responsibility
for decision making should be on the shoulders of those parts that
have the necessary experience and skills. For instance, a young,
impulsive part of yourself should not bear the responsibility for
deciding where you will live or what job you will take. Thus, it
may be helpful for you to develop an inner “team” that makes joint
decisions about important life situations and takes into account the
needs of all parts of yourself. Next we describe some specific
techniques that help with making decisions.
Techniques for Making Effective Decisions
Examine Pros and Cons
Make a list of options for a particular decision, taking into account
the needs and desires of all parts. Of course, no one can always
have what he or she wants, but for you to take seriously the desires
of all parts helps you to determine what is necessary, and perhaps
how parts may be able to get at least some of what they want or
need, if not now, then later. Write down the pros and cons
(advantages and disadvantages) of each choice and how it might
affect different parts of yourself. For example, you need to decide
on where to cut your expenses. You cannot cut your rent or
mortgage or other essentials, so you must cut those things which
are not essential to daily life. Write down the advantages and
disadvantages for each of several budget items that you are
considering reducing. Take note of how various parts of you react

to each item. Try to encourage all parts together to weigh the pros
and cons of each item.
Use a Rating System
Prioritize criteria you, in collaboration with other parts, want your
decision or plan to meet on a scale of 1–5. For example, if you are
making a decision about a vacation, your criteria might be for the
holiday to be safe, fun, comfortable, easy, and meaningful. Which
of these is most important? Perhaps you choose this order: 5–Safe;
4–Comfortable; 3–Meaningful; 2–Easy; 1–Fun. If you stay home
by yourself, would you meet these five criteria? If you go to a
family gathering, would you meet these criteria? If safety is a
priority, then any choice must include it. If easy and fun are less
important, then a choice may not need to include it.
Make Conscious Decisions: Not Deciding Is Deciding
It is easy to avoid making any decisions when the choices are
equally appealing or equally negative, or when you are afraid that
no matter what you decide, it will be wrong or stupid. However, if
you make no decisions, life always decides for you, in ways over
which you have no control and you may not like. In such cases, you
might consider whether the timing of a decision is best, whether it
is likely that you will have another chance to make a decision at a
later time, or whether there is a third option. And these hard
decisions are best made by consulting with people you can trust.
Most important, such decisions should not be made impulsively,
but thoughtfully.
EXERCISE
CREATING AN INNER MEETING SPACE FOR DECISION
MAKING
In chapter 8 you learned how to create an inner safe place for yourself and all
parts of you. This may be useful for you when you are trying to make
decisions that require input from all parts of yourself. In the exercise that
follows, you will learn how to create your own inner meeting space,
originally called the dissociative table technique (Fraser, 1991, 2003;
Krakauer, 2001). You may find it helpful to enlist the support of your
therapist to practice this exercise, if needed.
Imagine a place where you and all parts of yourself feel safe

and where you can gather to make important decisions. This
may be your usual safe space, or it might be a special room, a
place in nature, or any other place that feels comfortable. Once
you have imagined this place—its sounds, sensations, smells,
and sights, its dimensions and shape, and all that it contains—
allow yourself to imagine a table in this space that has room for
all parts of you to sit, should you choose. This table is specially
made just for you. Perhaps it is of beautiful wood with intricate
inlays, a magnificent slab of marble or granite, or sleek glass
and chrome. Imagine it just the way you want: a solid table to
support solid decisions.
Parts are not required to sit at the table: Perhaps some may
feel more comfortable hiding under the table, in a special niche
or corner, or other safe spots that are not too close and not too
far from the table. Still, you may invite all parts, as they are
able, to be seated in the comfortable chairs around the table.
Each part of you has just the right chair: the right height, the
right color and texture, the right support. Some might swivel,
some might rock, some might recline, some might be sturdy
executive chairs, some might be tiny chairs for children on
special platforms that adjust for their height.
Some parts of you may be willing to listen in but not (yet)
participate in the discussions around the table, or they may
designate a particular part of you to speak on their behalf.
When you can image that all parts of you who are able to join
are seated at the table, choose a part of yourself to be the
moderator of the discussion. This part of you will structure the
meeting, allowing each part to have a fair turn and be heard
respectfully. This part of you is able to reflect on what is
discussed, is able to take the various perspectives of parts into
consideration, and is dedicated to helping all parts of you reach
inner agreements that serve the best interests of you as a
whole person. If you desire, you may write down the discussion,
assign a “secretary” who can take minutes of the meeting, or
simply write down the discussion as you are able. If you
choose, you can imagine that helpful people come to join you at
your table, such as your therapist, a loving partner, a good
friend, or someone from the past who may be no longer with
you but whom you trusted to have your best interests at heart.
Begin with a relatively small issue in order to practice your
inner meeting skills as a team. For example, you might want to
discuss how to spend the evening or the weekend, using some
of the decision-making strategies mentioned in this chapter. If
at all possible, allow time for inner follow-up meetings in which
the results of your decisions are evaluated. The more parts of

you are assured that you take them seriously and do not ignore
or judge their needs and wishes, the more they will be willing to
cooperate.
Initially, these inner meetings might have the character of
business meetings, such as those that take place in work teams
and organizations. Eventually, they may also be used
constructively for more personal, emotional encounters, such
as inner sharing of joyful or healing experiences, and even
sharing of painful memories as all parts of you become ready
for that aspect of your work.

Homework Sheet 27.1
Developing an Inner Meeting Space
Practice creating and using your inner meeting space for decision
making by performing the following tasks:
• Decide on the room or space in which you want to meet (if
you do not have one already).
• If needed, decide which parts of yourself want to participate
in the meeting. If you have never practiced this technique, it
may be easiest to start with parts of yourself with which you
have some awareness, and parts that function in daily life.
• If parts of you remain stuck in the past, perhaps you might
assign them a “spokesperson” who can speak on their behalf,
while these parts listen in from a safe distance.
• Choose an inner “chairperson.” This may be you or another
part of you.
• Start with focusing your decision-making process on an easy
topic, perhaps something that you suspect all parts of you
will agree with.
• Describe your inner meeting, including the decision you were
able to make.
• Describe what worked well for you during your meeting.
• Describe any difficulties you encountered during your inner
meeting.

Homework Sheet 27.2
Using Decision-Making Techniques
You may use your inner meeting space for this exercise. Review
and choose one of the techniques for making decisions discussed in
the chapter: (1) examine pros and cons, taking all parts into
consideration; (2) use a rating system or another technique that you
find more suitable for yourself; (3) use intuition and past
experience; and (4) use reflection and creative solutions. By virtue
of choosing one of these techniques, you automatically choose to
make a conscious decision instead of avoiding a decision. Next,
choose a particular decision that you need to make (begin with one
that is not too difficult) and apply at least one of the techniques.
You may combine several, such as examining pros and cons, and
reflection and novel solutions. Write out your decision-making
process below.

PART SIX
SKILLS REVIEW
You have learned a number of skills in this section of the manual.
Below you will find a review of those skills and an opportunity to
develop them further. As you review, we encourage you to return to
the chapters to read them again and repractice the homework a little
at a time. Remember that regular, daily practice is essential to learn
new skills.
For each skill set below, answer the following questions:
1. In what situation(s) did you practice this skill?
2. How did this skill help you?
3. What, if any, difficulties have you had in practicing this
skill?
4. What additional help or resources might you need to feel
more successful in mastering this skill?
Chapter 22, Understanding and Coping With Angry Dissociative
Parts of Yourself
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 23, Reflecting on Your Inner Experience of Fear
1.
2.

3.
4.
Chapter 24, Coping With Shame
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 24, Coping With Guilt
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 25, Working With Inner Child Parts of Yourself
1.
2.
3.

4.
Chapter 25, Blending
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 26, Understanding More About Your Self-Harm
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 26, Working With a Dissociative Part That Engages in
Self-Harm
1.
2.
3.
4.

Chapter 27, Developing an Inner Meeting Space
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 27, Using Decision-Making Techniques
1.
2.
3.
4.

PART SEVEN
Improving Relationships With
Others

CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT
The Phobias of Attachment and
Attachment Loss
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: The Phobias of Attachment and Attachment Loss
Introduction
The Importance of Healthy Relationships
What Is a Healthy Relationship?
The Effects of Interpersonal Trauma on Relationships
The Phobia of Attachment and Difficulties With
Regulation
The Phobia of Attachment Loss and Difficulties With
Regulation
• Exercise: Finding Inner Common Ground About
Relationships
• Homework
Practice the exercise Finding Inner Common Ground
About Relationships.
Complete Homework Sheet 28.1, Finding Inner
Common Ground About Relationships.
Complete Homework Sheet 28.2, Your Experience of
Secure and Insecure Relationships.
Complete Homework Sheet 28.3, Balancing Self- and
Relational Regulation.
Introduction

As humans, we have a lifelong, biologically driven need to connect
with others: We are made to be social beings. Healthy relationships
can provide safety, protection, emotional regulation and soothing,
physical contact, companionship, communication, support, and a
sense of belonging. As John Bowlby, an eminent psychiatric
pioneer who studied attachment, noted,
Human beings of all ages are found to be at their happiest and
to be able to deploy their talents to best advantage when they
are confident that . . . there are one or more trusted persons
who will come to their aid should difficulties arise. (1973, p.
359)
However, our most intense emotions are evoked in
relationships, for better or worse. This makes relationships more
difficult to manage and maintain in a relatively stable manner.
Everyone has difficulties in a close relationship from time to time:
People are not perfect and their individual needs and wants do not
always coincide with those of others. We all misunderstand and
misperceive sometimes because we cannot read each other’s minds.
We occasionally say and do things that are hurtful to others, even
though it may be quite unintentional. The experience of being
betrayed, abandoned, rejected, or humiliated can evoke some of the
most intolerable feelings of hatred, rage, shame, loneliness, fear,
and despair. In this chapter we will discuss models for healthy
relationships and the difficulties that you may encounter in
relationships that are related to traumatization and dissociation.
The Importance of Healthy Relationships
We all base our adult models for interpersonal relations on our
early attachments. At that point in development, we learn how
relationships work, for better or worse, from our limited experience
in interactions with primary caregivers. Ever after, we respond in
relatively similar ways in close relationships and expect others to
respond similarly. We have thus developed a template or model in
which we try to fit all of our relationship to some degree, whether
they actually do or not. Relational models include certain persistent
core beliefs, for example, “I can trust others and am lovable,” “No
one really cares about me,” or “People are dangerous.” And
various dissociative parts of yourself may have their own relational

models that potentially conflict with one another, as we will discuss
later in this chapter. Fortunately, dysfunctional models can be
changed with mindful reflection and work on your ways of
perceiving relationships and other people.
Safe relationships that are nurturing, containing, and predictable
are essential to our healthy development from the cradle to the
grave. In fact, secure early primary relationships help regulate a
young infant’s immature physiological systems (including
distressed states and emotions), the first necessary step in the infant
learning to employ his or her own regulatory skills. Slade (1999)
noted that such relationships “predispose a child toward more
differentiated, coherent, and flexible functioning” (p. 584),
conditions necessary to healthy development across our entire life
span. In the next section you will find a partial list of guiding
principles for healthy personal relationships. Notice what you have
already incorporated into your relational model, as well as those on
which you wish to continue to work. And remember, these
principles are ideals: Because we are all human, no one is able to
live up to them perfectly all the time.
What Is a Healthy Personal Relationship?
• It is based on mutual respect, empathy, and equality.
• You both are able to set clear boundaries with each other and
be assertive without being aggressive.
• You both have a relatively healthy balance of autonomy,
dependence, and interdependence.
• You both feel secure in the relationship, but this feeling of
security does not depend on whether the person can be
available to you at all times.
• You both have a sense of the other person, even when they
are not with you, that is, you can hold him or her in your
mind and heart.
• You both can regulate your emotions that are evoked in
relationships.
• You both are able to negotiate and resolve most relational
conflicts and are willing to ask for outside help if needed to
get resolution because the relationship is valuable to both of
you.
• You both have a relatively secure and stable sense of self.

• You both have a basic trust that most people do not intend
you harm, and you can recognize those that do intend harm.
• You both are able to recognize and respect that the other
person has needs and desires, thoughts and feelings, and
goals and aspirations that may be different from yours.
• You can both generally accurately understand and reflect on
the motivations and intentions of the other person.
• The relationship is based on negotiations about what is best
for both of you, not on power and control, or dominance and
submission, or winning and losing.
• You can both talk about your inner feelings and experiences
without fear of rejection or humiliation.
Perhaps one of the most important aspects of a healthy
relationship is that room is made for mistakes, because we all make
them. In fact, healthy relationships follow a natural and inevitable
cycle of connection, disconnection, and reconnection, over and
over across time. Your ability to learn to flow along with this cycle
and not become stuck in disconnection is a key to making
relationships work. We will describe more about this later. But
first, we will discuss how being traumatized affects your
relationships.
The Effects of Interpersonal Trauma on
Relationships
Those who have been significantly hurt or betrayed in major
relationships, especially when they were young, generally develop
their relational model based on these highly unstable and
destructive bonds. Relationships themselves and various relational
events have been traumatizing and thus may be major triggers in
the present. Therefore, being in close relationship with another may
be one of the most challenging and triggering experiences for
individuals who have experienced interpersonal trauma.
People who have a dissociative disorder generally expect
rejection, hurt, betrayal, or abandonment; therefore, they have
major trust problems. They may develop a phobia of attachment, an
intense aversion to becoming too emotionally or physically close to
another person (Steele, Van der Hart, & Nijenhuis, 2001; Steele &
Van der Hart, 2009; Van der Hart et al., 2006). On the other hand,

traumatized people are in desperate need of stable and caring
interpersonal relationships. They may also develop a phobia of
attachment loss, an intense fear and panic about losing important
relationships. The need of the individual to simultaneously seek and
avoid relationships leads to severe inner conflict and confusion
among various parts of the personality, and it sends mixed
messages to the other person, who may also become confused and
frustrated. These relational phobias—of attachment and loss—are
two sides of the same coin and are the major focus of this chapter.
The Phobia of Attachment and Difficulties With
Regulation
In chapter 18, we discussed the importance of being able to regulate
yourself both by yourself (self- or auto-regulation) and with the
support of others (relational regulation). Individuals, or certain
parts of themselves, who avoid relationships generally prefer to
find ways to deal with problems by themselves rather than reaching
out to others for support and help. They have learned to become
self-sufficient and are mortified by their own dependency needs. In
fact, they often find that relationships are dysregulating rather than
helpful because they are so worried about being hurt.
Some people, however, may have little ability to regulate
themselves. They are thus more likely to engage in destructive
strategies to cope with relationships, for example, using self-harm,
drugs or alcohol, or excessive work. And, of course, some parts
may want to avoid relationships but other parts simply do not have
the skills to manage much regulation on their own, setting you up
to resort to self-destructive coping strategies.
You will likely have one or more parts of yourself that have
some degree of avoidance of becoming close to another person.
Perhaps you fear betrayal, hurt, indifference, or ridicule and thus
hold back. It is important to already begin to become more aware of
what you and all parts of you believe about, and expect and predict,
in relationships, because you can change dysfunctional beliefs with
some help. In addition, some parts of you may fear the intense
feelings, needs, and yearning that inevitably arise in a close
relationship, and by avoiding relationships, you avoid these strong
inner experiences (see chapter 5 on the phobia of inner experience).
Because there is so much conflict, fear, shame, and confusion about

relationships, you likely have trouble keeping yourself regulated in
your window of tolerance.
Most people with a dissociative disorder do not avoid
relationships completely but struggle significantly in the
relationships that they do have. Parts of you that are phobic of
attachment typically have several major innate ways to cope when
they feel threatened in relationships. We discussed these reflexive
strategies more generally earlier in chapter 4 on understanding
dissociative parts of yourself. They include flight, freeze, fight, and
collapse. Perhaps you recognize one or more of these defenses in
yourself in the context of a relationship. For example, during a
conflict, you or a part of you just wants to leave and get away, or
avoid talking about it (flight). Or you or a part of you feels so afraid
that you are frozen and cannot move or think of what you would
like to say (freeze). Perhaps you or a part of you becomes angry and
gets into heated arguments (fight). Or you or a part of you even
shuts down so thoroughly that you curl up in a ball and are not
responsive, not feeling or thinking anything (collapse or shutdown).
Each of these is an example of how you might avoid or even
sabotage relationships with others. Each involves a high degree of
dysregulation: you are either hyperaroused or hypoaroused.
At times, some parts of you may be highly critical of other
people, warning you that they are not to be trusted, are dangerous
or useless, or only out to get something from you. They predict
catastrophe because they are so stuck in past traumatic experiences
where they were indeed hurt and betrayed. This inner experience
only serves to make you more dysregulated and upset. These parts
are unfortunately bound by their own limited perceptions to a world
where every relationship will repeat the hurts of the past. Inner
voices may also attack you internally, criticizing and ridiculing
you: “How could anyone love you? You are so stupid and needy, no
one can stand to be around you!” In this way, they help you avoid
relationship by convincing you that no one could tolerate you. Of
course, this evokes the shame and despair that you must have felt at
times as a child, and these inner voices are re-creating what it felt
like in the past, which keeps you from taking any risk in
relationships in the present.
Based on understandable reasons, these parts of you that are
phobic of attachment often have intense reactions to the parts of
you that want to have relationships and feel a desperate need to be

with another person. Because they realize that having needs in the
past was hurtful to you, they may viciously attack these parts,
humiliating and despising them. Although this misguided behavior
is hurtful to you as a whole person, the original intent was one of
protection, since rigidly suppressing your needs might have been
the only protection possible in the past. For example, they may call
these parts “crybabies,” tell them they are disgusting or ridiculous,
that they are just trying to get you hurt all over again, that they
should be punished and locked away. Of course, as we have
discussed earlier, this provokes the other parts to become every
more fearful and needy and ashamed, so the inner cycle of chaos
and turmoil continues. Yet it is essential for you to understand and
develop empathy for these parts who really only want to protect
you from further harm: They just need to learn more healthy ways
of doing so.
The Phobia of Attachment Loss and Difficulties With
Regulation
Now we turn to the parts of you that may be desperate for
connection. Perhaps you or parts of you experience panic when you
are alone, feeling that you will be alone forever. Or when you
predict that someone might abandon or reject you, intense fear and
rage are evoked. Such desperation and need for connection can be
profoundly dysregulating and overwhelming. And perhaps you are
deeply ashamed of these needs and of the parts of you that have
them. However, we all have need for connection and care, to feel
special and loved in the eyes of another. These are not bad needs
and desires: They are normal. It is important to understand and
accept this fact and be empathic toward all your needs and desires
as a whole person.
Of course, parts of you may be stuck in trauma-time,
reexperiencing periods when you so desperately needed care and
support and did not receive it. Thus, they may be in a constant state
of frantic seeking and clinging. It is important to understand that
this desperate experience is a normal and natural defense in itself:
Young animals and humans naturally become panicked when their
mother is out of sight, and they cry out for her and cling to her
when she returns, because she is their protection against the
dangers of the world. This innate seeking and urgent crying is

designed to bring the mother back to provide safety, nurturance,
and relationship: That is its protective function (McLean, 1985).
Most young dissociative parts have unmet attachment needs.
Other parts may attack or be disgusted by them because they
continue to reexperience betrayal and hurt by early caregivers.
However, this serves only to increase their frantic seeking of help
and support, sustaining your inner conflict between approaching
and avoiding relationships.
Dissociative parts of a person who have a phobia of attachment
loss generally prefer to be soothed and regulated by other people,
and they often have serious difficulties with self-regulation. They
have learned many different strategies to seek out people and avoid
being alone. This comes at a cost, however: They tend to exhaust
others, who then pull away, creating the very scenario these parts
fear, which further reinforces the beliefs of attachment-phobic parts
that relationships are hurtful.
On the other hand, some parts may seek out others by being
“people pleasers.” Such parts may be rather submissive, avoid
being aware of or expressing their own needs and feelings, and try
to keep people close by doing whatever they want. But they do not
get their needs met, because there is no true emotional intimacy in
this type of relational dynamic. This strategy eventually exhausts
the person as a whole, and other parts inevitably become resentful
and angry. Strategies to be more assertive and realize your own
needs are discussed in chapter 32 on boundaries.
In summary, people with a dissociative disorder experience a
confusing and conflicting set of relational phobias: Some parts of
themselves fear being too close, while others fear losing
relationships. This conundrum plays itself out as various parts of
yourself simultaneously or alternately seeking and rejecting
closeness with others. This fear-based (and often shame-based)
dilemma makes it difficult to cope with relational disruptions. Next
you will find ways to cope with such disturbances.
EXERCISE
FINDING INNER COMMON GROUND ABOUT
RELATIONSHIPS
This exercise will help you learn to empathize with all parts regarding their
position on relationships. Use the meeting place technique from chapter 27

(or some other method) to gather all parts together. You may ask for help
from your therapist for this inner meeting if you need or want it.
Begin by getting yourself comfortable and calm. In your
mind’s eye, imagine your meeting space, the one just for you,
and allow all parts that are able to attend. Some may sit closer
and some farther away. Some may prefer to be outside the
room, listening in. Each part of you can find a comfortable
place. Begin the meeting with a statement that all parts are
welcome and are invited to be heard. Also emphasize that all
parts will be respected, and that no criticism is allowed during
this meeting. Then begin to find some common ground upon
which you could all agree about relationships. For example, you
can surely understand that when you have been hurt, no part of
you would want to be hurt again in a relationship, and some
parts might thus avoid them. You can begin to understand their
worldview, their core beliefs, their feelings of fear and anger
and isolation, not an easy inner world to experience. Walk in
their shoes for just a moment and feel empathy for how difficult
it is.
And you can surely agree that all parts of you have been
alone and lacked much necessary care and support from
others, and thus some parts would quite naturally want to seek
out the comfort, support, and enjoyments of what they have
missed. You can begin to understand their worldview, their core
beliefs, their feelings of loneliness and need and desperation,
not an easy inner world to experience. Walk in their shoes for
moment and feel empathy for how difficult it is.
Be aware that you are all struggling so hard, each in your
own way, and have your own suffering and needs. Perhaps all
parts of you could agree that you do not want to be hurt and
that you would like to feel better. See if that is so. And perhaps
all parts of you could agree that if you could know for sure that
a relationship was trustworthy, it would be worth having. See if
that is so. Now you are beginning to find some common
ground. Just stay with what you are able to agree on, no matter
how small, and leave the rest for another time. Experience what
it feels like to be in agreement, all together. Savor this moment
for awhile.
Now, in the same way that parts need to feel safe, secure,
and supported in relationships, free from hurt, free from
criticism, free from rejection, each part needs to feel the same
with other parts inside. The more all parts of you practice
treating each other as you would want to be treated by other
people, the more safe and calm and ready to cope with

relationships you will be. This meeting is a good start. Come
back often to this place and reexperience the common ground
upon which you can all agree. Work together, respect each
other, take your time, and you will begin to feel better, safer,
more stable and strong.

Homework Sheet 28.1
Finding Inner Common Ground About Relationships
1. Reflect back on the exercise, Finding Inner Common Ground
About Relationships, and describe your experience of your inner
meeting with parts of yourself. For example, what did you feel?
What did you expect? Were you able to find some common
ground? Did you find that some parts had a more difficult time with
the exercise than others? What were the obstacles to agreement; for
example, were parts too critical or too scared?
2. Practice this exercise each day at home. If you have difficulties,
discuss them with your therapist and practice during your therapy
session so you can learn to find common ground.

Homework Sheet 28.2
Your Experience of Secure and Insecure Relationships
1. Describe an experience in which you felt secure in a relationship.
For example, what were your emotions, thoughts, sensations, and
actions?
2. Using the same experience in #1 above, describe how various
parts of you felt, if it was different from what you experienced.
3. Describe any conflicts among parts. For example, were some
parts afraid, angry, or mistrustful? Did you feel an urge to withdraw
from the relationship? Did any parts criticize you or other parts of
you for being in the relationship or for what you felt?
4. Describe an experience during which you felt a little unsure or
insecure in a relationship. Choose a minor incident, not a major
one. For example, what were your emotions, thoughts, sensations,
and actions?
5. Using the same experience in #4 above, describe how various
parts of you felt, if it was different from what you experienced.
6. Using the same experience in #4 above, describe any conflicts
among parts. For example, did some parts want to continue to be
with the person, while other parts wanted to get away? Did some
parts want to start a fight, while others wanted to run and hide? Did
any part criticize you or other parts of you, or blame you for what
went wrong?

Homework Sheet 28.3
Balancing Self- and Relational Regulation
1. Describe times when regulating yourself is preferable to being
with someone else to calm yourself down. For example, if you feel
stressed or anxious, you prefer to withdraw and think it through and
deal with your feelings on your own.
2. Describe how you calm, comfort, or reassure yourself when you
are alone.
3. Describe why soothing yourself is preferable to receiving
soothing from others in these incidences.
4. Describe times when you find that being regulated in a
relationship is preferable to soothing yourself alone. For example,
if you feel stressed or anxious, you prefer to call a friend or talk to
your therapist in a session, rather than deal with it on your own.
5. Describe what about a supportive relationship helps calm you.
6. Most people have at least some balance between self- and
relational regulation. Please describe what (approximate) percent of
the time you self-soothe versus what (approximate) percent of the
time you seek out relational reassurance and support. Various parts
of you may prefer different ways, and, if so, notice which parts
desire self- or relational soothing and support. If you want those
percentages to change, please describe what you would ideally
prefer, and notice whether there is any inner conflict about
changing.
7. Spend some time thinking about and discussing with your
therapist how you might achieve a better balance between self-

soothing and relational support, if you need to change your balance.
For example, you might write below some of the core beliefs that
support self- or relational support (“People should take care of
themselves and not ask for help” or “I can’t do anything by myself,
certainly not support myself!”)

CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE
Resolving Relational Conflict
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: Resolving Relational Conflict
Introduction
Basic Skills for Resolving Relational Conflicts
Resovling Relational Conflicts for People With a
Complex Dissociative Disorder
• Homework
Complete Homework Sheet 29.1, Using Conflict
Management Skills.
Continue to practice inner safe space, empathy and
cooperation among parts of yourself, and relaxation
exercises if you feel stressed when managing conflicts.
Introduction
Conflict in relationships is inevitable. Although coping with
conflict is not always easy, you can learn skills that will help you
resolve disagreements and disruptions with others. We will briefly
discuss some of these essential capacities in the next section. But
we recognize that merely learning skills does not resolve your own
inner conflicts among parts of yourself and the tendency of various
parts to react based on the painful past before you can think and
respond mindfully. Thus, we will also address ways for you to help
all parts of yourself cope more effectively with conflict in
relationships.

Basic Skills for Resolving Relational Conflicts
As we noted in the previous chapter, the emotions evoked in our
relationships with others are some of the most powerful we
experience, for better or worse. And because each of us has at least
some different needs and goals from the other, and because we can
misunderstand and be misunderstood despite good intentions,
conflicts will occur, evoking intense feelings. Thus, staying within
a window of tolerance can sometimes be a struggle during
disagreements or quarrels, particularly when we feel shamed,
threatened, or seriously misunderstood.
We each have our own template or model of dealing with these
conflicts, based on our early experiences and on what we have
learned since. Some people avoid conflict at all cost and give in to
the needs of others; some seem almost eager to argue, ever ready to
fight for what they need and want. Others seem to avoid conflict,
while quietly making an end run around the other person to get
what they want. Some treat relationships almost like a chess game,
always thinking ahead to anticipate the other person’s moves and
their own moves in response. And some people understand that
conflict is merely a part of being in relationship. They neither seek
nor avoid it, but meet it with equanimity and reflection, searching
for solutions that take into account the best interests of both people.
Time and experience have shown this last approach works best.
People are able to cope most effectively with relational conflicts
when they possess the following abilities:
• They can be present and focused on the here and now. They
are not focused on hurts of the past or possible negative
outcomes in the future.
• They attend to the verbal and nonverbal communications of
the other person.
• They deal with conflicts as they occur, and they do not avoid
conflicts.
• They are able to reflect accurately on their own inner
experience and that of the other person, and they pay equal
attention to the needs and wants of themselves and those of
the other (see chapter 6).
• They stay within their window of tolerance (see chapter 18).
They are able to regulate thoughts, feelings, and expectations.

When people are relatively calm, they can more accurately
read and interpret verbal and nonverbal communications.
And they can better communicate their own needs assertively
without threatening, punishing, or shaming others.
• They are aware and respectful of different viewpoints, needs,
and desires. They speak and act in a respectful manner
because they are able to reflect and remain within their
window of tolerance.
• They are willing to compromise in ways that take into
account the needs of self and others.
Of course, these skills are not easy to employ when your
relational model of conflict is based on expectations that others will
hurt, ignore, exploit, or betray you, and when parts of you react
with defensive freezing, flight, fight, or collapse or adapting to
every wish and need of the other person. Next we will discuss some
ways to address your inner struggles with relationship difficulties.
Resolving Relational Conflicts for People With a
Complex Dissociative Disorder
Conflicts in relationships can be one of the most serious triggers for
people with a dissociative disorder. Even when minor conflicts
occur, you or parts of you may have an intense or overwhelming
reaction (for example, terror, rage, shame, panic, collapse).
Generally these triggered reactions occur because parts of you are
living in trauma-time, and because you have developed core beliefs
and a relational model in which disruptions are always interpreted
as dangerous or catastrophic. When a conflict occurs, the phobias
of attachment or attachment loss, or both, activate various parts of
you that already have inner disagreements about relationships (see
chapter 28). This only serves to increase your intense and
instantaneous reactions, making you feel more out of control. It is
important to at least cognitively recognize that relational problems
are on a continuum from very minor to, indeed, devastating. Not all
are cataclysmic; in fact, most are not. Next we offer some ways to
cope with relational conflicts and disruptions.
Observing How Others Relate
When you feel relatively safe and calm, take some time to observe

other people’s relationships, because this may offer you insights
into effective (and ineffective) ways to deal with relationships.
Notice how people relate to each other, for example, by going to a
restaurant or mall and just observing. Make sure you encourage all
parts to watch and listen, so all parts of you can learn. Notice that
many relationships are good, safe, and stable. Thus, not all
relationships are dangerous or doomed to fail. Some people will
have better skills than others, so pay close attention to those who
seem content and relaxed. Make sure all parts of you notice what
these people do differently in relating to others. This kind of
observation, in addition to asking friends about their successes in
relationships, is a good way to learn better relational strategies.
If some parts do not feel safe enough to watch, you (and other
parts) can observe and report to them what you have learned, or
they can watch from a distance. You might also want to do some
reading about healthy relationships and encourage all parts of you
to read along or listen. Spend time getting to know parts of you and
their core beliefs about relationships and predictions about other
people. Once you are more aware of these, you can begin to
challenge them with empathy and respect.
Take a Time-Out
When you, or some parts of you, are triggered by a relational
conflict, whether you are angry, hurt, afraid, or panicked, stop and
give yourself a time-out. Or perhaps help parts of you take a time-
out by going to their inner safe space. Inform the other person that
you need to take a break and will come back to discuss the conflict
at a later time on which you can both agree (from a few minutes to
the next day or so). Set a firm time to come back to resolve the
issue—do not continue to avoid it. When you take your time-out,
go to a quiet place where you will not be disturbed, slow your
breathing, talk inwardly to all parts to reassure them that you are
safe, and help parts go to their inner safe places. You might want to
take a short walk, lie down and imagine being in your safe place, or
distract yourself until you calm down. Use your anchors to the
present and make every effort to stay in the present and orient all
parts to the here and now.
Reflect on Your Own and the Other Person’s Intentions and
Actions

Once you have calmed down, you can take time to reflect on what
happened. One of the most important ways to cope with relational
conflicts is to be able to reflect on the other person’s possible
motivations and intentions (see chapter 6 on learning to reflect).
You then may be able to understand and empathize with, for
example, a friend’s abruptness because she did not feel well or was
late to an appointment. And you can then relax because her
abruptness was not meant as a personal snub of you. Help all parts
of you be a part of this reflective time if possible. If not, ask parts
who are upset to stay in a safe space while you (and perhaps other
parts of you) reflect on the situation without such emotional
intensity. Then return to those parts that have been triggered, help
them calm down, and share your insights with them.
It is also important to reflect on your own reactions, including
those of various parts of yourself. If you have been able to stop and
take a time-out, you have already been able to notice that you
needed to do so and have stopped your immediate reaction. It is
essential to be able to step back and notice that you, or parts of you,
are reacting, not responding, and to notice how you are reacting,
rather than just continuing to be controlled by the reaction. For
example, you might notice that when your friend was abrupt, you,
or a part of you, immediately felt paralyzed and cold. Perhaps you
immediately assumed she did not want to be with you, which
terrified a part with phobia of attachment loss. Simultaneously, a
part of you felt enraged, because you felt snubbed. You can begin
by noting to yourself something like, “I am frozen. This is a
familiar experience. I need to step back and help myself get calm
before I think or do anything else.”
Once you are aware of certain repetitive reactions you can
begin to work to understand the parts that have those reactions, and
how to help them be more aware of and open to the accurate
perceptions of the here and now.
Orient Parts to the Present
Of course, many dissociative parts have a very restricted world, in
which they reexperience the same awful feelings time and time
again in relationships. It is vital that you become more aware of and
empathic with these parts, helping them become ever more
grounded and oriented in the present, where at least some of your
experiences are indeed different and more positive than in the past.

Support Avoidant Parts to Deal with Conflict
Other parts may be so numb and shut down, or so rigidly attentive
to nonrelational activities such as work or solitary activities, that
connection and disconnection seem to be of no importance. They
have an extreme phobia of attachment. Such parts appear oblivious
to your own and the other person’s needs. When these parts
function in daily life for extended periods, they can profoundly
affect your relationships, which become ignored and neglected.
This stance is of no help to you or your significant others. Again,
empathy is sorely needed for these parts, because they are merely
trying to go on with daily life as best they can by ignoring intense
inner or relational chaos. Your task is to help these parts feel more
secure in knowing that you can manage both daily life and your
inner world to empathize with their experience; however, you also
need to share your needs and desires with them and begin to find
common ground. Of course, this will be a work in progress, but
every small step takes you further into healing.
Protect Vulnerable Parts of Yourself
If you know particular relational situations are likely to trigger parts
of you, take the time beforehand to help these parts use their safe
place(s), so they can begin to trust that there are parts of you that
can handle these situations. For example, if your friend said
something that was unintentionally hurtful, before you meet or
speak again, talk inwardly to vulnerable parts, explaining that the
hurt was unintentional, that she is your friend, that you are capable
of working out conflicts with others, and that parts of you that are
stronger will discuss the problem with her.
For many people with a dissociative disorder, a sexual
relationship in the present may be a major trigger for vulnerable
parts living in trauma-time. It may precipitate flashbacks and
defensive reactions, especially freeze or collapse. Some people may
be confused about the difference between emotional and sexual
intimacy, which makes it difficult to accurately interpret the
intentions of the other person. We will address this subject a little
more in chapter 32 on boundaries, and we also advise that you
discuss sexuality and sexual relationships with your therapist
because these are important parts of your healing.
Calm and Contain Angry Parts of Yourself

A common and natural reaction to feeling hurt, rejected, or shamed
is to react in anger. People may simply want to strike out verbally
(or even physically) to make the other person back off. Or some
parts may become obsessed with making the other person
experience the same or worse, feeling justified in their actions
(revenge). Behaving in disrespectful, hurtful, or shaming ways only
increases relational conflicts and decreases trust; it does not help
you heal or have the loving relationships that you need in your life.
Perhaps you are aware of parts of yourself that experience
intense anger in conflicts, or perhaps you wish to avoid them. But it
is essential to begin to empathize with the intense hurt and rage
these parts of you feel. The sense of being heard and understood is
already one step in the direction of becoming calmer. At the same
time, you as a whole person must strive to set appropriate limits
with these parts of yourself. The more you practice the skills in this
manual, and particularly in this chapter, the more control you will
have over explosive reactions or hurtful passive-aggressive
behaviors, such as the “silent treatment,” sulking, withholding love,
or other underhanded ways of punishing the other person. The more
you treat others in the way you wish to be treated, the more likely
you will be to have better relationships. That said, of course, there
are people who are truly dangerous and intentionally hurtful. You
need to be able to identify and avoid such individuals.
Some additional ways to handle relational disruptions are found
in chapter 32 on boundaries. And there are many readily available
resources online and in books or classes that can help you learn to
cope with relationships more effectively.

Homework Sheet 29.1
Using Conflict Management Skills
If you have a minor conflict during the coming week with another
person, use as many of the skills listed in this chapter (and below)
to cope. If you do not have a conflict during the week, describe one
from the past and imagine using these skills to manage the conflict
differently than you actually did. Then answer the questions below.
Skills
• Be present and focused on the here and now
• Orient parts of you to the present
• Reflect on your own and the other person’s experiences and
intentions
• Stay within your window of tolerance
• Take a time-out, or help parts of you go to an inner safe space
• Help numb or avoidant parts of yourself
• Help angry parts of yourself
• Protect vulnerable parts of yourself
• Be respectful of yourself and the other person
• Be willing to compromise
1. Which skills did you use or imagine using? Describe any
difficulties you have with employing these skills.
2. Notice whether all parts of you can accept these skills as
important and would like to learn them. Describe any fears or
concerns of various parts about using these skills. Once you have
described the fears and concerns, reflect on whether there are
cognitive distortions or negative core beliefs at their roots.
Example: “I am afraid I cannot protect myself if I am not angry.”
Reflection: While it is important to protect myself, it is also important to
consider the context and the intentions of the other person to determine to
what degree I need protection. Perhaps the person did not mean to hurt me
intentionally, but merely disagrees with my viewpoint, or said something that
made me feel discounted, but was not meant to harm me. And there are many
ways to protect myself during relational conflicts, not only by being angry. I

can be assertive (see the next chapter) about what I need, rather than angry
and aggressive. I can be present and realize I am not in danger and thus have
more options to respond available to me. I can take a time-out and check in
with all parts to reassure and orient them, to clarify inaccurate beliefs and
perceptions.

CHAPTER THIRTY
Coping With Isolation and
Loneliness
AGENDA
• Welcome and reactions to previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: Coping With Isolation and Loneliness
Introduction
Understanding Isolation
Understanding Loneliness
Reflections on Your Experience of Isolation and
Loneliness
Tips for Coping With Isolation and Loneliness
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 30.1, Reflecting on a Time
of Isolation and Loneliness.
Complete Homework Sheet 30.2, Skills to Resolve
Isolation and Loneliness.
Introduction
In this manual we have discussed many reasons why people with a
dissociative disorder might isolate themselves and feel lonely.
Isolation is the state of being alone and separated from others.
Loneliness is a sense of utter aloneness at a time when you most
need someone to love or support you, and it can evoke panic and
desperation. The fear or emptiness of being alone is a major
precipitant of crises, including self-harm and suicide attempts. Even

if you have friends or family, you may feel like an outsider who
does not belong. Or you may experience relationships as
exhausting, complicated, and frightening, and thus isolate yourself.
Mistrust is a pervasive hindrance to feeling connected in the present
with other people and a force that pushes you further into isolation.
This type of isolation may breed loneliness. In this chapter we will
discuss these feelings of isolation and aloneness, some of the
factors that maintain them, and suggest some first steps to change
patterns of isolation.
Understanding Isolation
In her classic book, Trauma and Recovery, Judith Herman (1992),
one of the pioneers in the field of chronic childhood abuse,
describes how trauma destroys bonds between the individual and
his or her community. This is especially true when abuse or neglect
involves trusted caregivers. Feelings of abandonment and betrayal,
and a sense of alienation or disconnection, may interfere with
subsequent relationships, regardless of the degree of closeness or
distance of the other person. And of course, feeling isolated and
being isolated may not be the same things. One can feel utterly
isolated and alone even while he or she is surrounded by people.
Maintenance of Isolation
Social isolation may be maintained and reinforced by certain
perceptions, predictions, emotions, and thoughts. Core beliefs, such
as “People can’t be trusted” or “If anyone really knew me, they
would be disgusted,” support ongoing withdrawal from others. The
fear and shame of “being found out” can be paralyzing if you think
you are a bad person or if you are holding secrets that feel shameful
to you, contributing to an increasing sense of isolation and
disconnection. Mistrust is a major impediment to becoming less
isolated. People with a dissociative disorder typically have many
predictions about how people will betray, disappoint, or hurt them.
Many find it difficult to take risks to be in relationships (see chapter
28 on phobias of attachment). And once inevitable conflicts occur,
they are often quick to withdraw, expecting the worst (see chapter
29 on relational conflicts). Some people are isolated simply because
they do not have adequate social skills to make friends and stay
connected. But usually a lack of social skills accompanies the more

complex inner experiences described earlier. Fortunately, social
skills, like any other skill, can be learned.
Isolation Among Dissociative Parts
For those with a dissociative disorder, inner isolation of
dissociative parts is a painful additional struggle. Some parts are
stuck in a time of trauma during which they were isolated, feeling
perpetually alone and in need. These parts feel alone no matter how
much other parts may feel connected with some people. Other parts
may have been “banished” from inner awareness out of shame,
fear, or disgust, or are neglected behind inner barriers. The more
inner disconnection among parts of the self, the more likely
isolation and loneliness are problematic. These inner “barriers”
between parts are maintained by ongoing shame, fear, and
subsequent avoidance (see chapter 5 on the phobia of inner
experience).
Isolation as a Reenactment of the Traumatic Past
Many traumatized individuals were quite isolated from supportive
others during their childhoods. They typically endured the
aftermath of abuse alone. On the one hand, this likely generated
terrible loneliness, but on the other hand, isolation was also a signal
that “it’s over now,” that is, the abuse had ended. Thus, some
people, or parts of themselves, automatically retreat to isolation to
gain a sense of safety and relief. They may develop a habit of
isolating when they are stressed in the present, often without even
realizing what they are doing or why.
Isolation and Dysfunctional Boundaries
In chapter 32 you will learn about the disadvantages of lax or rigid
personal boundaries. Both of these can lead to problems with
isolation and loneliness. Lax boundaries mean that people can
intrude into your life more than you want, and thus some parts of
you may isolate to protect themselves from too many demands
instead of setting appropriate and assertive limits with others. Rigid
boundaries keep people out perhaps more than is helpful for you,
leading to a self-imposed isolation that may result in profound
loneliness. It is important to be able to identify your personal
boundaries and how they affect your sense of isolation or
loneliness.

Understanding Loneliness
Loneliness is a complex condition involving problems with social
skills, difficulties with attachment, particular emotions, thoughts
and core beliefs, situational issues, and sometimes, unrealistic
expectations. Loneliness is not the same as being alone. We all
have times when we are alone either due to circumstances or by
choice. Alone time can be pleasant and rejuvenating when you
choose it (see chapter 11 on using free time and relaxation). But
when you do not want to be alone, when you are yearning to be
with others, when you experience the need to be with others and are
unable to soothe yourself, you will feel lonely. And as we
mentioned earlier, you may feel lonely even though you are in the
company of people, because you feel so disconnected. Loneliness
can lead to further feelings of rejection, low self-esteem, shame,
and even despair. In fact, loneliness can feel similar to intense grief
following the death of a loved one, and it can be overwhelming in
its unbearable sense of separateness.
Loneliness, Fear, and Shame
You, or some parts of you, may isolate because you feel afraid or
overwhelmed by other people, and perhaps because you feel
ashamed of who you are. On the one hand, you feel some relief that
you are avoiding what you experience to be stressful and vulnerable
situations. But on the other hand, you may feel lonely, because we
are social beings at heart and have an innate drive to be with others.
Loneliness and the Phobias of Attachment and Attachment
Loss
As you learned earlier in this manual, you, or parts of you, may
have a phobia of attachment loss, that is, of separation, rejection, or
abandonment, while other parts of you may be afraid to be
connected with others (see chapter 28). Thus, you have a major
conflict about being alone: Some parts wish to be alone and find
safety in solitude, while other parts feel lonely and find safety in
connection with others. It is important for you to acknowledge both
and to resolve each side of this powerful conflict.
Loneliness as a Reenactment of the Past
People who were abused or neglected as children often experienced
profound loneliness on top of lacking support for overwhelming

feelings and experiences. This traumatic loneliness can be
reexperienced in the present as a kind of flashback in which those
feelings are relived. Because isolation and loneliness might have
commonly followed on the heels of abuse, some people
automatically isolate and feel lonely when something painful
happens in the present. They are reenacting the lonely past.
Reflections on Your Experience of Isolation and
Loneliness
• As always, the first step in overcoming a problem is to reflect
on it. Take some time (with or without the help of your
therapist) to have an inner meeting among parts to begin
talking about isolation and loneliness instead of just
experiencing them.
• Begin by asking all parts to participate, as they are able. Even
if some parts cannot, you may be able to sense or know
something about how that part experiences and deals with
isolation and loneliness.
• Notice conflicts among parts of yourself about being isolated
or lonely.
• Are there parts of you that prefer to be alone? If so, do they
enjoy alone time, or are they avoiding other people or
stressful situations? Do they ever feel lonely? Are they aware
of and attend to the needs of other lonely parts who may not
want to be isolated? What do they feel and think about these
parts of yourself? Is there any communication among these
two types of parts?
• Are there parts of you that are very lonely and want to be
with other people? If so, what keeps them from reaching out
to others? Are they stuck in trauma-time, fearful of other
people, socially anxious, lacking in social skills? Are they
aware of parts of you that might prefer to have alone time or
be isolated? Using an inner meeting space, try to encourage
parts that isolate to communicate with parts that feel lonely
without judgment, and visa versa. Can they find common
ground; for example, is there agreement that it is good for all
parts not to feel afraid, ashamed, or lonely?
• Notice what prompts you to isolate. Does it happen when you

are stressed, after a hard therapy session, when you want to
avoid a conflict, or when you feel ill? Are there other
alternatives for you to take instead? For example, calling or
e-mailing a friend about your stress or problems, being
assertive in dealing with a conflict, asking someone to help
you if you are ill. Notice any inner obstacles to making
different choices than your usual ones.
• Pay attention to what you and all parts of you experience
when you are isolated. Do you feel panic, disconnected,
shameful, lonely, or numb?
• What happens in your body when you feel lonely; for
example, do you feel tense, cold, paralyzed, or frenetic?
• Notice your thoughts and core beliefs.
• What do you expect if you reach out to others when you feel
lonely? What do you expect if you are alone and cannot reach
someone?
• Are parts of you able to empathize with each other in their
need for isolation or their yearning not to be lonely? How
might you and your therapist further facilitate and strengthen
that empathy, which can lead to cooperation and resolution of
the conflict?
Tips for Coping With Isolation and Loneliness
• Begin with grounding yourself, using the exercises in this
manual and other ways you have learned to help yourself be
in the present.
• Next, reflect inwardly (using the previous section as a guide,
if you want) to determine your conflicts and what all parts of
you need and want.
• First focus on internal isolation and loneliness. You may use
all of the skills in this manual to support yourself and all
parts inside in becoming less isolated and lonely internally:
accepting and connecting with each other; reflecting;
orienting parts to the present; helping parts develop empathy,
communication, and cooperation; soothing and calming parts;
developing safe places; developing pleasant or fun activities
that all parts of you can enjoy as a whole person.
• The more you connect with all parts of yourself, the less

overwhelmed you will be, which will help you feel more
comfortable in connecting with others.
• The more you can accept yourself and all parts of you, the
less ashamed and afraid you will be to connect with others.
• If you have severe problems connecting with others or
making friends, begin with what is easiest. Is it easier to talk
with one person, or with more than one? Does it help you to
have a shared topic (such as volunteer work or a hobby)?
You might consider taking a class to learn something new,
where you will have a chance to meet new people, or
volunteer where you will be with others.
• Some people with a dissociative disorder prefer to meet
people on the Internet and chat or have a pen pal. This is not
ideal, but it is a start.
• Some people find having a pet helps them to feel less
isolated. And a friendly pet is a great source of conversation
with other people if you go out for walks.
• Isolation can be a habit. Make an effort to get out or be with
friends on a regular basis, even though it may be hard to do.
If needed, encourage overwhelmed parts of you to stay in a
safe space while you connect with others.
• Make necessary alone time pleasant (for example, with nice
music, a good book or movie, healthy and tasty food, a walk,
etc.) and productive (see chapter 11 on using free time).
• If you have religious or spiritual preferences, make use of
mediation or prayer during your alone time to feel more
connected to God or the universe. (You might reflect on
whether your concept of God as loving or vengeful reflects
your past experiences with other people.) And of course
some people feel supported by attending the religious house
of their preference or by spiritual meetings with others of like
mind.
• Stay present so you can at least connect to the world around
you. Walk outside and listen to the birds or look at the trees.
There is life all around, and it will help if you can feel at least
a little connection to it.
• Make an effort to reach out to others instead of waiting for
them to call you.

Homework Sheet 30.1
Reflecting on a Time of Isolation and Loneliness
Choose a recent time when you felt isolated, lonely, or both and
then answer the questions below.
1. Describe the situation in which you felt isolated and lonely.
2. Describe any specific triggers for you to isolate or feel lonely, if
you are aware. Were any of these triggers present in the situation
described above?
3. Describe any parts of you that might have been involved in
isolating or feeling lonely. Describe any conflicts among parts that
isolate and parts that feel lonely.
4. Describe your experience of being isolated or lonely (including
the experience of various parts of yourself). You may include
thoughts, feelings, sensations, perceptions, and predictions.
5. If someone had reached out to you, or you had reached out to
someone, what would you have wanted from that other person in
this situation? What kept you from reaching out?
6. List two or three small, manageable steps you could take to begin
addressing your isolation and loneliness.

Homework Sheet 30.2
Skills to Resolve Isolation and Loneliness
Most of the skills you have learned in this manual can help you in
some way to cope with and resolve your isolation and loneliness.
Below you will find a number of these skills. Choose any four of
the skills and describe one of the following next to each of the four
skills:
• A situation in which you used the skill to cope successfully
with isolation or loneliness. Describe what worked well.
• A situation in which you tried the skill but it did not help or
you were not able to complete it. Describe what interfered or
was too difficult.
• A situation in which you would like to try the skill.
Skills
1. Staying grounded and in the present.
2. Orienting parts of yourself to the present.
3. Reflecting on your experience of isolation or loneliness.
4. Using inner safe space.
5. Using alone time productively.
6. Being aware of and challenging core beliefs and thoughts.
7. Being aware of and regulating emotions.
8. Empathic communication with inner parts of yourself (including

use of a meeting space).
9. Negotiating with parts phobic of attachment and those phobic of
attachment loss.
10. Coping with a trigger for isolation or loneliness.
11. Regulating yourself within your window of tolerance.
12. Coping with fear or shame.
13. Being assertive.
14. Changing a dysfunctional personal boundary.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE
Learning to Be Assertive
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: Learning to Be Assertive
Introduction
Basic Assertiveness Skills
Nonassertive Strategies: Appeasement, Avoidance, and
Aggression
Problems With Assertiveness in People With a
Complex Dissociative Disorder
Helping Parts of Yourself Cooperate in Being
Assertive
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 31.1, Identifying Inner
Conflicts That Prevent Assertiveness.
Complete Homework Sheet 31.2, Using Assertiveness
Skills: A Retrospective Look.
Complete Homework Sheet 31.3, Preparing to Be
Assertive in an Upcoming Situation.
Introduction
Assertiveness is an essential interpersonal skill that involves being
able to express your needs and desires in a confident manner that
does not violate the rights of others and is not aggressive (Paterson,
2000; Phelps & Austin, 2002). It is active, not passive or forceful,
and involves respect for self and others. It is a way to ask

confidently for what you want, without harming anyone. Being
assertive involves being able to know what you think, feel, need,
and want, and then saying it clearly and respectfully. It also
involves being able to set appropriate limits and boundaries without
feeling guilty (see chapter 32 on boundaries; Adams, 2005;
Dorrepaal, Thomaes, & Draijer, 2008; Linden, 2008). Assertiveness
is always about clear, respectful communication between people.
In this chapter you will learn basic assertiveness skills and how
to help different parts of yourself overcome obstacles that prevent
you as a whole person to be more assertive. The chapter begins
with some basic assertiveness skills, then discusses general
difficulties with being assertive, and the special problems
encountered by those with a complex dissociative disorder. Finally,
we will share tips for helping all parts of you learn to be assertive
together as a whole person.
Basic Assertiveness Skills
Assertive behavior offers people a number of important benefits.
Assertive people tend to have fewer relational conflicts, and thus
less overall stress. And because they have fewer conflicts, assertive
people often have more stable and strong relationships with others.
They get their needs met more consistently, and they can help
others get their needs met as well, which further strengthens
relationships.
How you view yourself and others is central to whether you are
able to be assertive; thus, reflection is a major part of assertiveness
skills. You must reflect on your own opinions, thoughts, feelings,
needs, and also on those of other people. Assertiveness requires
some self-confidence, but you can learn it with practice even when
you do not yet feel completely at ease with yourself or others.
Assertiveness includes being able to do the following:
• Give and receive constructive criticism or feedback
• Ask for something; make a request
• Set clear limits by saying “no” or “not now”
• See both sides of an issue and negotiate on behalf of your
viewpoint
There are a number of ways to express yourself and your position
such that others will be more likely to listen to you.

• Listen reflectively. When another person is speaking to you,
try not to formulate responses in your head. Instead, listen
with an open mind and make sure you understand him or her.
You can clarify by saying something like, “Let me make sure
I understand you,” and then summarize what the person has
said. Feel free to ask questions about what you do not
understand, for example, “I am not quite sure what you
meant about . . . could you say more about it?”
• Use respectful humor, when appropriate. Humor can lighten a
situation and is a nice way to stay connected with another
person.
• Provide a context. Briefly explain why you want something
or why you disagree, so that people do not assume you are
trying to hurt them. “What you have to say is important to
me, and I don’t want to hurt your feelings, but I have to get
off the phone now so I will get to my appointment on time.”
• Be as specific and clear as possible. Vague or tentative
statements will likely lead to misinterpretation, for example,
instead of “I wonder what is playing at the movies? What do
you want do to?” say, “I want to see a movie tonight. Would
you like to go with me?” The following statements are clear:
“I want. . . .” “I need. . . .” “I feel. . . .” “I don’t want to. . . .”
“I hear what you are saying, and can agree with you
on . . . but disagree with you on. . . .”
• Ask for feedback and then listen carefully to the other person.
Ask the other person whether you are being clear and
whether your position makes sense. Then ask for feedback,
showing the other person that you are open to his or her
opinions and needs as well, instead of just making a demand.
• “Own” your message. Use “I” statements instead of “you”
statements (even when you have a dissociative disorder and
use of the first person may be difficult at times).
Acknowledge that what you are saying is yours and do not
blame others, for example, “I don’t agree with you,” rather
than, “You are wrong.” And when you criticize someone or
give feedback, make it as specific and respectful as possible.
• Make eye contact. When you look directly at someone (not
staring, but comfortably in visual contact), the person is more
likely to be able to hear what you are saying.
• Use your body language. Turn toward the other person and

face him or her. Stand or sit tall, not slumped down and not
angry.
• Be congruent. Your facial expression and body language
should match what you are saying. Do not smile if you are
angry or look afraid if you are trying to stand up for yourself.
• Use a normal tone of voice. Speak in your normal voice, not
louder, timidly, quietly, or hesitantly. Pay attention to your
tone, inflection, and volume and modulate them as you need.
• Find the right time. If you are able, the best way to deal with
most situations is as they happen. But if you need to reflect in
order not to make impulsive decisions, “buy” yourself some
time. For example, you can say, “I need to think about that.
Let me get back to you.” Then choose a specific time to have
the discussion so it does not get avoided. Generally, the best
practice is to respond in the moment. It will allow you to
focus on your feelings at the time. However, it is never too
late to return to a person at a later time to share your feelings
about an interaction.
As you begin to practice, start with small steps, being assertive
about minor issues. You are likely already familiar with many
assertiveness skills. However, even though you may cognitively
understand the value of being assertive, there are a number of
reasons why it may be difficult. Next you will learn about common
nonassertive strategies, why people use them, and how to change
them.
Nonassertive Strategies: Appeasement, Avoidance,
and Aggression
We each learned our patterns of expressing and negotiating our
needs and wants in our families as we grew up. Some people may
have had few opportunities to say “No,” or to ask for what they
wanted, or they were punished if they did. Perhaps a family simply
was not aware of assertiveness skills and did not know how to
model and teach them. Other people learned to be especially
aggressive, or that being aggressive was the only way to get what
they needed. There are also learned cultural, religious, and gender
role differences in assertiveness skills.
From these early experiences, we each develop core beliefs

about assertiveness that affect how assertive we will or will not be,
and in what situations we can be assertive. For example, “I have no
right to an opinion; I don’t deserve to get what I need; Other
people must be satisfied before I can get what I need; It’s OK to ask
for what I need; Needs are not nice to have; I can’t get what I
want; People will respect me when I speak up for myself; Men are
supposed to take, while women are supposed to give; I should never
say ‘no’ when someone asks a favor; It is important to take care of
myself and be respectful of others; I can set boundaries with
friends, but not with my family; in most cases, almost everyone can
get what they need.”
Usually people who have difficulties being assertive will
engage in appeasement, avoidance, or aggression when they need
to make a choice or are in conflict with another person.
Appeasement
Some people are afraid they will anger or burden others with their
needs, and they will then be rejected or harmed. These people are
“people pleasers,” so they put a lot of energy into appeasing
behaviors, that is, making others happy and fulfilled at the expense
of themselves. Even if they manage to be assertive, if the other
person reacts strongly, they will back down and even apologize and
feel they have done something wrong. They are generally passive
and submissive, and they rarely show anger. However, they do
experience resentment and anger that they do not show to others.
They feel taken advantage of and underappreciated, and sometimes
they expect that others should “know” what they need and want
without having to say it. They view conflict in terms of “I lose–you
win, because your needs are more important, and I am afraid you
will be angry or reject me if I ask for something, and besides you
don’t care about what I want.”
Avoidance
Some people have such a phobia of inner experience or are so
confused internally that they completely avoid knowing their own
needs or wants, and thus they are unable to articulate them. They
appear to be appeasing because they generally go along with what
others want, not out of conscious fear, but simply because they
cannot find their own inner compass to direct them toward what
they need. They view conflict as: “You win because I don’t know, it

really doesn’t matter to me, and I don’t care.”
Aggression
Some people are convinced that the only way to get their needs met
is to be forceful and aggressively fight for their rights, as others are
only out to get what they want for themselves. These people do not
understand the difference between aggression and assertiveness,
quickly distrust the motives of others, are fearful that others will
hurt or take advantage of them, have little empathy for what others
may need, and are easily put on the defensive. They may come
across as being entitled or bullying, and they view conflicts in
terms of “I win because I deserve to get what I need, even if I have
to force you to give it to me–I don’t really care if you lose. If you
happened to win after I have fought as hard as I could, you have
certainly taken advantage of me and greatly injured me.”
Examples
To explore how each of these behaviors might look, imagine you
have a boss who asks you to work overtime during the weekend for
the second time in a month. You had planned months ago an
important weekend with your family or friends, you are all looking
forward to it, and you have already worked extra during the week.
Appeasement. You say, “Can’t you find someone else?” Your
boss answers, “No, I’ve already tried and no one else can do it.”
You feel pressured and are afraid your boss will be angry or even
fire you, and say, “Alright, I’ll do it.” But at the same time you feel
enormous tension, and you become anxious as you envision the
disappointment or anger from your family or friends. You resent
being used and caught between the needs of your boss, your own
needs, and the needs of your family or friends. You feel a terrible
dilemma because you need to please your boss and your family or
friends, and you have given in to the one who pressures you most in
the moment. Your family and friends are disappointed and angry
that you did not stand up to your boss. You feel helpless, hopeless,
and resentful, and you are not very productive at work during the
weekend.
Avoidance. You find it difficult to think clearly about whether
you should work or keep your plans for the weekend. You feel
muddled. On the one hand, it is good to do what your boss tells
you; on the other hand, your friends are expecting you. Working is

OK, and time with friends is OK. It is difficult to imagine how your
boss or your friends will feel, or perhaps it does not occur to you to
think about how they feel. It really does not matter to you, as you
have no idea which choice is better or more important for you. It
seems too hard to sort out, so you agree to work to avoid thinking
about it anymore.
Aggression. You immediately become irritated or angry with
your boss and say, “That’s your problem, not mine! You always ask
me! Why don’t you work yourself? This place is pathetic!” You feel
furious and used, and you feel that your boss does not appreciate
your hard work at all, but only expects more of you. Then you walk
away angrily. You fume the entire weekend about how
unreasonable and mean your boss is and how he always picks on
you. Your family or friends do not enjoy being with you, because
you are so angry and upset. And you do not enjoy your weekend.
Assertiveness. You are thoughtful for a moment and then say,
“I’m sorry, I will be unable to work. I empathize with you that work
needs to be done. However, this is my time off and I have plans for
the weekend that I made some time ago with friends and family. My
work is important to me, but time with friends and family is also
important to me. And I value keeping my word and balancing my
life. I am glad to discuss first thing next week how I can be of help,
and how our team might better plan our work to be more efficient
during the week in the future.” You leave feeling satisfied that you
offered a good compromise to your boss (regardless of whether he
or she accepted it graciously), set a reasonable limit, said “no” to
something you would have resented, and still have your weekend to
which you look forward.
Problems With Assertiveness in People With a
Complex Dissociative Disorder
Like many people in general, individuals who have a complex
dissociative disorder often have difficulties with being assertive,
engaging instead in some of the ineffective approaches described
earlier. An additional complication involves unresolved conflicts
among parts that make being assertive difficult. For example, an
angry part may tend to be aggressive, while a fearful part might
want to give in. The aggressive part then also becomes angry
internally with the fearful part for being so passive, and in turn, the

fearful part becomes more afraid. As a result, the person as a whole
may be left feeling overwhelmed, caught up in inner turmoil, and
wanting to avoid situations in which choices and assertiveness are
needed.
As you can see from the previous example, dissociative parts
are often not assertive with each other internally, employing
aggression, avoidance, or appeasement instead. Thus, you are not
only learning how to be assertive with other people, but each part
of you is learning more about how to relate to other parts. Each
dissociative part of you reacts to situations (and to other parts of
yourself) according to the specific worldview of that part, which is
often based in trauma-time. Thus, if a part has a tendency to engage
in a particular behavior, for example, freezing, running away and
avoiding, fighting and being aggressive, or submitting, that
behavior may well be employed automatically, not only in
situations in the present, but in reaction to other parts of yourself.
To understand the inner struggles you might have among
various parts of yourself, return to the previous example of a boss
who asks you to work overtime during the weekend when you
already had plans. As soon as your boss approaches, even before he
or she says anything, a child part of you is convinced that you are
in trouble and you feel yourself freezing. A critical voice berates
the younger part for being afraid, and it is ready to be aggressive
with your idiotic boss. You are already primed for action, but it is
action based on flight or fight, not on being present and assertive.
Your boss then asks you to work over the weekend. The younger
part immediately wants to say, “Yes, I’ll be glad to” so as not to
anger the boss, relieved that she is not in trouble yet, but still afraid.
The angry part of you immediately wants to yell at the boss for his
or her ridiculous demands. A part of you that dreads the time with
friends because you are so uncomfortable around others breathes a
sigh of relief that you now have an excuse not to go. Another part
of you desperately wants some time off to play. You are able to
consider being assertive, but you are so distracted by the inner
conflict and activities among parts of yourself that you stand there
with a confused look on your face and do not quite know what to
do. In an extreme case, a person might switch to one of these parts
to solve the conflict through control rather than assertiveness.
Next you will find some tips on how to work with parts of
yourself to increase your ability to be assertive.

Helping Parts of Yourself Cooperate in Being
Assertive
In this section you will find a series of steps that will help all parts
of you become more willing to experiment with being safely
assertive and become more proficient at it. These steps require time
and practice and thus cannot always be used when a decision must
be made in the moment. They are best used for times when you
know you need to be assertive in an upcoming situation, and you
have the time and willingness to prepare for it. But the more your
practice these steps, the more quickly and automatically all parts of
you will be able to be assertive when the situation calls for it.
• Use your inner meeting room. Gather all parts of you in your
inner meeting room (see chapter 27), or use another way to
have inner discussions that works best for you. Help all parts
be as oriented to the present as possible, so you can have a
dialogue about assertiveness and resolving the inner obstacles
to it.
• Engage in inner reflection. Listen respectfully to all parts of
yourself and learn more about what each part needs and
wants, even if you do not agree. Notice how various parts of
yourself react to situations in which being assertive would be
helpful. And notice how parts react to each other.
• Reflecting on inner conflicts. When parts of you have
differing opinions, emotions, and behaviors regarding a
challenging situation, you may not yet be able to act
assertively. However, in the meantime, such situations can be
learning experiences upon which all parts can reflect in
retrospect (see chapter 6 on reflection). For example, what
did each part want or need at the time? What were their
concerns or fears? What, if anything, triggered parts of you?
What outcome did each part of you want? What did parts of
you want to do at the time (whether they actually did
something or not)? How did parts of you react to each other
during and after the situation? As you become more aware of
the inner conflicts that prevent you from being assertive, you
can begin the process of resolving them, using the steps that
follow.
• Challenge dysfunctional core beliefs and thoughts. As you

are aware of the beliefs and thoughts that support a particular
reaction of a part of you, try to establish communication and
have an inner dialogue about those beliefs, for example, “I
don’t deserve to have anything; If I ask for anything, I won’t
get it, so I might as well take it (or give up).”
• Negotiate empathically. Work toward inner agreements on
how to act assertively in a certain situation that is coming up
in the near future, and determine whether parts would be
willing to compromise or delay getting what they want or
need, if necessary. Find ways for all parts to feel satisfied
with your decisions, as best you can (see chapter 27).
• Agree on which parts of you deal with the situation. Work
toward obtaining sufficient inner cooperation so that more
rational adult parts of you with relational skills can deal with
a situation in which you need to be assertive. Prepare your
message, so that you know exactly what you want to say. For
example, “I am not coming to visit you this week; I don’t
mean to hurt your feelings, but I have some obligations that I
must take care of (or, I need some time to rest).”
• Help fearful, avoidant, or angry parts of yourself. Certainly it
takes time for angry or fearful parts of you to become more
oriented and calm, and learn new skills. If parts of you are
still quite reactive, you might try to help them go to an inner
safe space during situations where you need to be assertive.
This requires a level of inner agreement that assertiveness
will be helpful for all parts and more likely to get their needs
met. Begin by explaining why assertiveness is more
effective, or by encouraging all parts of you to read the
chapter together, or perhaps read it out loud to them (reading
out loud helps you retain the content). Ask all parts whether
they are willing to allow an “experiment” in which an adult
and more rational part of you practices being assertive in a
minor situation, while these parts remain in a safe place.
Afterwards, bring all parts of you together to discuss how the
situation turned out for you. Be sure to listen respectfully to
feedback from all parts. Initially, it might be helpful to have
fearful or very angry parts agree to stay in their inner safe
places while the more cognitively inclined parts act
assertively. Eventually, such parts could watch from behind
an imaginary one-way screen or through a window, thus

being at a safe distance and learning from the assertive
behavior that other parts are able to model.
• Use imaginal rehearsal. Visualize yourself being
successfully assertive (see chapter 15 for more on imaginal
rehearsal). Also try to envision various responses of the other
person and prepare yourself to deal with them. It also may be
helpful to role play the situation with a trusted friend or
partner, or your therapist. Gather all parts together and
imagine they are supporting each other during this situation,
so that you feel stronger and of one mind. You might also
imagine a safe and trusted other person standing beside you
to support you in the situation.
• Blending. Various forms of blending (which were discussed
in chapter 25) can be useful in helping parts learn to be more
assertive. As a first step, for example, a fearful part could
look through the eyes of the adult part that is being assertive,
to gradually become more familiar with the skills for and
benefits of assertiveness. As you become more comfortable
with blending, a more aggressive part might be willing to
blend with parts that have better assertive skills, or even pair
with a more fearful part to support that part in being stronger
and more assertive. Check with your therapist to get help
with blending, if needed.
• Take a time-out. When you are suddenly confronted with a
situation where you immediately need to be assertive, you
will not have much time for inner reflection and preparation.
You may feel frozen or overwhelmed by inner turmoil in the
moment. Always try to make time for yourself by telling the
person you will respond to his or her request as soon as
possible because you need to consider it first. You might
even just take a quick bathroom break to think about if for a
minute, saying, “I’ll be right back and respond then.” A
time-out will give you and your parts inside a chance to
“gather yourself together” and prepare for an assertive
response that takes into account your needs, then the needs of
the other person and the situation.

Homework Sheet 31.1
Identifying Inner Conflicts That Prevent Assertiveness
Choose a recent situation in which you wanted to be assertive but
were not able to be. Using the steps provided in the previous
section, use an inner meeting to identify reasons why being
assertive was difficult; then answer the questions below.
1. Describe the situation.
2. Describe the reactions of various parts of yourself at the time and
their concerns or fears.
3. If there were specific things that triggered you or parts of you
during the situation, list them below, including your reaction to
them.
4. What did each part of you want as an outcome of the situation?
Is there inner agreement on the outcome or differences of opinion?
If there were differences of opinion, describe the conflicts.
5. Describe how parts of you reacted to each other during and after
the situation.
6. In retrospect, describe, as best you are able, a more effective way
all parts might have dealt with the situation.

Homework Sheet 31.2
Using Assertiveness Skills: A Retrospective Look
1. Describe a recent situation in which you were able to be
assertive, even if only partially so.
2. What skills were you able to use? Refer back to the beginning of
the chapter for descriptions of these skills and check all that apply
below.
Listen reflectively.
Use respectful humor.
Provide a context.
Be as specific and clear as possible.
Ask for feedback and then listen carefully to the other
person.
Own your message.
Make eye contact.
Use your body language.
Be congruent.
Use a normal tone of voice.
Find the right time.
3. If you had difficulties with some of the skills above, circle them
and describe your difficulties below.
4. Did the difficulties you described in #3 involve inner conflicts
among parts of yourself? If so, please describe the conflict(s).
5. Were all parts of you satisfied with the outcome of the situation?
If so, describe how the needs of various parts of you were met. If
not, describe why some parts of you were not satisfied, and what
they would have wanted the outcome to be.

Homework Sheet 31.3
Preparing to Be Assertive in an Upcoming Situation
Choose an upcoming situation in which you need to be assertive.
Choose a situation that reflects the level of challenge for which you
feel ready.
1. Describe the upcoming situation.
2. What is the outcome you would like to occur?
3. Have an inner meeting in which you discuss the upcoming
situation with all parts of yourself. Following the step-by-step
approach in the section above on Helping Parts of Yourself
Cooperate in Being Assertive and describe the responses of parts of
yourself to each step.
Reflect on the needs and desires of parts of yourself
regarding the situation and describe them below.
List any inner conflicts about the situation.
List any dysfunctional core beliefs or thoughts about the
situation and how you respectfully challenged them.
Describe how you attempted to negotiate empathically with
all parts about dealing with the situation, and their reactions.
Agree on which parts of you will deal with the situation and
describe how parts of you reacted to this negotiation.
Help fearful, avoidant, or angry parts of yourself by
orienting to the present, discussing their fears or concerns,
taking into consideration their needs and wants, and offering
an inner safe space during the situation. Describe what you
were able to do, and how parts reacted.
Use imaginal rehearsal to envision a successful outcome of
the situation. Enlist the help of a trusted other, including
your therapist, if you need. Describe your experience of this
exercise.
Practice forms of blending, if you are ready and able, before

the situation, so that you will be ready to deal with the
situation from a position of strength and confidence.
Describe you experience of blending, if you were able to do
so.

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO
Setting Healthy Personal Boundaries
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Topic: Setting Healthy Personal Boundaries
Introduction
Healthy Boundaries
Unhealthy Boundaries
Problems With Boundaries for People With a Complex
Dissociative Disorder
Helping Parts of Yourself Cooperate to Set Healthy
Boundaries
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Complete Homework Sheet 32.1, Identifying Your
Personal Boundaries.
Complete Homework Sheet 32.2, Your Personal Space
and Optimal Level of Closeness and Distance.
Complete Homework Sheet 32.3, Preparing to Set
Boundaries in an Upcoming Situation.
Introduction
In the previous chapter you learned more about how to be assertive.
Assertiveness skills are essential for setting your personal
boundaries, which are your guidelines for reasonable and safe ways
for other people to behave around you, and for how you will
respond if someone crosses your boundaries (Adams, 2005).
Boundaries help you stay both separate from and connected with

others (Linden, 2008), including your comfort level with how
emotionally and physically close or distant you are from people.
Your boundaries are related to how close or distant you wish to be
with other people. When you have a dissociative disorder, you
often have conflicts not only about being assertive but also about
the optimal emotional distance between you and another person
(also see chapters 28 and 29 on relationships). You may feel
confused about how to be separate from others but still close.
Various parts of you may push people away, not wanting to be
close, while other parts appease people to get closer or keep them
from leaving or rejecting you, resulting in confusing and unclear
boundaries. In this chapter you will learn more about different
types of personal boundaries, how to set them, and how to help all
parts of yourself negotiate reasonable boundaries.
Healthy Boundaries
Healthy boundaries help you protect and take care of yourself.
They can be set respectfully, but firmly: Boundaries are not threats.
They are clear communications about your limits and the
consequences of crossing your limits when a person continues to do
so. The other person has a choice about whether to continue his or
her behavior; thus, the consequences of your limits are the result of
the other person’s behavior. Boundaries most often have to do with
how much time you spend with a person, how much you do for that
person, how much emotional energy you put into the relationship,
and how other people treat you. And they sometimes involve issues
about money, that is, how finances are managed, how much money
you are willing to spend, and how much you are willing for your
partner to spend.
Some people may be confused about whether setting boundaries
is an attempt to control others. It is not; rather, it is a way to be
responsible for ourselves and our lives. When we set a boundary,
we let go of being invested in the outcome. This distinguishes
boundaries from attempts to control. For example, if you are friends
with a person who is drinking, and she calls you on the phone or
shows up at your house drunk, you can set a boundary, but you
have to be willing to accept the consequences of your limits. You
can be clear and respectful by saying, “I feel uncomfortable and
disconnected from you when you are drinking. I value you, and our

friendship, and miss connection with you, but I no longer want you
to call me or come to my home if you have been drinking that day.
If you do, I will not speak with you or let you in. And if you
continue to call or come to my home when you have been drinking,
I will have to reconsider what to do, including ending our
relationship.” In this case, you hope your friend will respect your
limits and be willing to get help with her drinking. But those are her
choices that you cannot control. You must be willing to follow
through with what you said you would do and tolerate her
reactions, and even risk losing the friendship in an extreme case.
Optimal Relational Closeness and Distance
As we have discussed earlier, every relationship has normal
fluctuations in emotional (and physical) closeness and distance (see
chapters 28 and 29 on relationships). And every person has his or
her own preferences about what is too close or too distant, both in
general and in specific situations. There is a wide range of what is
normal, but typically people have a kind of balance where they are
not intrusive or smothering of others and are not too distant or
avoidant of contact. It is common for everyone to have some
conflicts about closeness and distance from time to time. Your
personal range is a subjective experience based on what you have
learned, what you want, and what you are comfortable with. Many
relational conflicts involve mismatches in how close or distant two
people want and need to be at a given time and across the course of
the relationship.
It is important to understand that most of the time when people
want more distance, it is not because they do not care for you, but
rather they are seeking what feels right at that moment for them,
just like you ideally would do for yourself. And when people in the
present want to be more close to you, usually they are not trying to
smother, control, or hurt you. As we discussed previously, this
might be difficult to comprehend if you have parts stuck in trauma-
time that continue to think you always have to do what the other
person wants or else you will get hurt.
Some major healthy personal boundaries follow, so you can
begin to have a better idea of what to strive for in small steps that
are right for you.
Healthy Personal Boundaries

• You are able to say “yes” or “no” to others.
• You are OK with someone saying “no” to you.
• You respect yourself.
• You share responsibility and power in a relationship. You are
neither controlled nor controlling.
• You can identify or be receptive to hearing about your
mistakes or role in a relational problem, and you take
responsibility for them.
• You share personal information gradually in a mutually
sharing and trusting relationship.
• You do not tolerate abuse or disrespect.
• You know your own wants, needs, and feelings.
• You communicate your wants, needs, and feelings clearly to
the other person.
• You know your physical and sexual boundaries and are able
to keep them.
• You are responsible for your own life, and you allow other
adults to be responsible for theirs.
• You value your opinions and feelings and those of others.
• You respect the boundaries of other people and expect them
to respect yours.
• You are able to ask for help when you need it and can
manage on your own when appropriate.
• You do not compromise your values or integrity to avoid
rejection.
• You are willing to follow through with consequences if a
person continues crossing your boundaries.
Unhealthy Boundaries
Unhealthy boundaries are either too lax or too rigid. Lax or
“collapsed” boundaries leave you at the mercy of other people’s
wants and needs. Rigid boundaries isolate you and prevent people
from being close enough to have a significant relationship with
you.
Next you will find basic characteristics of lax and rigid
boundaries.
Lax or Collapsed Boundaries

• You cannot say “no,” because you are afraid of rejection or
abandonment or the anger or disappointment of others.
• You are so unclear about your own identity that you let others
define who you are and what you do.
• You tend to be either overly responsible and controlling, or
passive and dependent.
• You take on other people’s problems and feelings as your
own.
• You share too much personal information too soon in a
relationship. You do not know how to pace personal sharing.
• You cannot say “no” to unwanted sexual contact; find
yourself in sexual relationships you do not really want; or
think that it is OK to always agree to have sex if the other
person wants it.
• You have a high tolerance for, or ignore, being abused or
treated with disrespect.
• You have trouble identifying your needs, wants, and feelings.
• If you are able to identify them, your wants, needs, and
feelings are almost always secondary to those of other
people.
• You feel responsible for the happiness and well-being of
other people, and you ignore your own.
• You rely on the help, opinions, feelings, and ideas of others
more than your own.
• You rely on other people’s boundaries instead of having your
own.
• You compromise your values and beliefs to please others or
to avoid conflict.
• If you do set a boundary, you back down if the other person
pushes a little.
Rigid Boundaries
• You say “no” far more often than “yes,” especially if the
request involves close interaction.
• You avoid intimacy by failing to communicate, picking
fights, working too much, and otherwise being unavailable.
• You have a phobia of attachment (getting too close) and
perhaps of attachment loss (being rejected or abandoned),
which keep you at a distance.

• You rarely share personal information and feel uncomfortable
when you do.
• You have difficulty identifying your wants, needs, feelings,
and in response, you distance yourself from others.
• You have few or no close relationships. You spend the
majority of your free time alone.
• You rarely ask for help.
• You are not curious about or respectful of other people’s
boundaries if they do not fit with yours.
• You do not want to get involved with other people’s
problems.
Problems With Boundaries for People With a
Complex Dissociative Disorder
For individuals with a dissociative disorder, each dissociative part
likely has a different need and preference for particular boundaries
and for relational closeness and distance. Some parts of you may
have a profound desire to really belong with someone, to be
connected, to be seen and appreciated, and to feel that the other
person cares for you. Some parts experience themselves as young,
overwhelmed, and incapable, and thus feel very dependent and
needy of other people. These parts are often terrified of
abandonment and have collapsed boundaries, willing to do
whatever the other person wants, which makes you very vulnerable
to being hurt further. Others parts despise dependency and do not
want to get close to others at all, having built a high wall around
themselves to keep people out. These parts pride themselves on
being self-sufficient and independent. And some part(s) of you may
have a much more adaptive balance. But it is likely that you
experience serious inner conflicts about boundaries and optimal
closeness and distance in relationships. Because of your painful
experiences in the past, parts of you make extra efforts to avoid any
potential for rejection, abandonment, or hurt, whether that is by
giving in or keeping distance. In the maelstrom of all these
contradictory wishes and emotions among parts, it can be difficult
for you to know which boundaries are helpful and healthy.
Sexual boundary problems. People with a dissociative disorder
may find it hard to set sexual boundaries, because they are afraid of
violence, ridicule, or rejection if they do. Or they may

compulsively have sex as a kind of reenactment. Others set
extremely rigid boundaries, excluding sex from their lives. Perhaps
they, or parts of them, are ashamed of sexual feelings and may be
unable to discuss sexual issues with their partner, for example,
sharing what they do and do not like in a sexual encounter. Some
dissociative parts may strongly influence sexual encounters with
strangers or mere acquaintances, making themselves extremely
vulnerable to danger. Other parts may believe that sex is the only
way to get close to a person, so they have no sexual boundaries.
Some parts do not feel anything at all, such that sex is irrelevant,
while others feel pain and get triggered. Some parts might find sex
disgusting or frightening. Finally, as we described in chapter 29,
some parts are triggered by sex, which evokes painful memories.
These parts may sometimes confuse the current partner with the
original perpetrator.
Sexuality is often an issue that causes intense feelings and may
be compulsive, shameful, or confusing for you or parts of you. If
you experience problems in a sexual relationship with your partner,
or you recognize any of the problems described, we encourage you
to discuss it with your individual therapist and perhaps to read
some of the helpful books on sexual relationships after sexual abuse
(for example, Carnes, 1997; Graber, 1991; Maltz, 2001).
Next you will find tips to help you work with all parts of
yourself on healthy boundaries. You will notice that the structure is
the same as that from the previous chapter in which you worked
with parts to become more assertive.
Helping Parts of Yourself Cooperate to Set Healthy
Boundaries
• Make a list of your current boundaries. Once you have
written them down, add additional ones you would like to
have, even if there is inner disagreement.
• Make a list of boundaries you would like to set but have not
yet been able to.
• Use your inner meeting room. Gather all parts of you in your
inner meeting room (see chapter 27), or use another way to
have inner discussions that works best for you. Help all parts
be as oriented to the present as possible, so you can have a

dialogue about boundaries and resolving the inner obstacles
to them.
• Engage in inner reflection. Listen respectfully to all parts of
yourself and learn more about what each part needs and
wants about boundaries, even if you do not agree. Notice
how various parts of yourself react to situations in which
setting boundaries would be helpful. And notice how parts
react to each other.
• Understand inner conflicts about boundaries. When parts of
you have differing opinions, emotions, and behaviors
regarding a particular boundary, it may be hard to find a
balance. For example, some parts want to be touched and
hugged, and others do not want to be touched or even close to
another person. As a first step, acknowledge and respect both
sides of the conflict, and find common ground (for example,
all parts want to be safe and feel OK). As you become more
aware of the inner conflicts that prevent you setting healthy
boundaries, you can begin the process of resolving them,
using the steps that follow.
• Challenge dysfunctional core beliefs and thoughts. As you
become aware of the beliefs and thoughts that support a
particular unhealthy boundary (too lax or too rigid), try to
establish communication and have an inner dialogue about
those beliefs, for example, “I believe that if I share something
vulnerable, people will use it against me, so I never share” or
“I don’t like being hit and called names, but you have to put
up with a lot to get love.”
• Negotiate empathically. Work toward inner agreements on
what boundaries to set in general, as well as in specific
situations or with a certain person. Remember that some of
your boundaries can be different with various people. It is
helpful to find boundaries that all parts can agree help you
feel safe and respected.
• Agree on which parts of you deal with boundary setting.
Work toward obtaining sufficient inner cooperation so that
more rational adult parts of you with relational skills can set
boundaries firmly but without being punitive. Prepare your
message, so that you know exactly what you want to say. For
example, “I want you to stop yelling at me when we have an
argument. If you yell, I will leave the room and do something

else until you are calm enough to talk and stay connected. If
you continue to yell, I will have to consider other options,
including ending the relationship.”
• Preparing parts of yourself to set boundaries. Various parts
of you will need time and attention in order to be ready to set
some boundaries. Start where you can, and in the meantime,
help all parts be oriented and calm; learn more about
assertiveness skills to help you set boundaries, and more
about healthy boundaries. If parts of you are still quite
reactive, you might try to help them go to an inner safe space
during situations in which you need to set boundaries. This
requires a level of inner agreement that boundaries and limits
will be helpful for all parts by keeping them safe. Begin by
explaining why boundaries are effective, by encouraging all
parts of you to read the chapter together, or perhaps read it
out loud to them (reading out loud helps you retain the
content). Ask whether all parts are willing to allow an
“experiment” in which an adult and more rational part of you
practices setting a small boundary in a minor situation, while
these parts remain in a safe place. Afterward, bring all parts
of you together to discuss how the situation turned out for
you. Be sure to listen respectfully to feedback from all parts.
• Use imaginal rehearsal. Visualize yourself successfully
setting healthy boundaries (see chapter 15). Also try to
envision various responses of the other person and prepare
yourself to deal with them. It also may be helpful to role play
the situation with a trusted friend or partner, or your
therapist. Gather all parts together and imagine they are
supporting each other during this situation, so that you feel
stronger and of one mind. You might also imagine a safe and
trusted other person standing beside you to support you.
• Blending. Various forms of blending, which were discussed
in chapter 25, can be useful in helping parts set clear and firm
boundaries. More fearful parts could be supported by
stronger parts, and perhaps temper the aggression of stronger
parts.

Homework Sheet 32.1
Identifying Your Personal Boundaries
1. Make a list of your current personal boundaries and limits
(different parts may have different boundaries and limits).
2. Try to determine whether these boundaries are healthy, lax, or
rigid. On your list above, make a mark indicating the category of
each boundary. If you are not sure, you might check with trusted
others.
3. What helps you keep your boundaries? Are there parts of you
that can help you set healthy boundaries? Please describe.
4. List any particular boundaries that you find especially hard to
keep.
5. What makes it difficult to keep your boundaries? Are there parts
of you that contribute to making certain boundaries hard to keep?
Please describe.
6. Notice whether your boundaries are different than those of
people around you. Describe how you deal with those differences.
7. Notice if there are conflicts among parts of you regarding
particular boundaries, and describe the conflicts.
8. Make a list of healthy boundaries you would like to set but have
not yet been able to. Describe what makes it difficult to set these
new limits.

Homework Sheet 32.2
Your Personal Space and Optimal Level of Closeness
and Distance
1. Make a drawing or representation of yourself in the center of a
sheet of paper. (It can be a stick figure. Your artistic ability is not
important to this exercise.) Next, draw or represent the people who
are important to you and label them by name. Indicate your current
boundaries between yourself and these people by means of lines
(thick, thin, absent, continuous, dotted, irregular) or representations
(walls, gates, waterways, bridges, hedges, whatever you like) that
express the degree of closeness or distance. Notice whether the
general level of closeness and distance is something you want, or
whether there is conflict about it among inner parts of yourself.
2. Draw an imaginary circle around yourself based on the distance
for which it is comfortable for you to have other people near you.
This is your “personal space.” For most people it is around 2 feet,
but it may be more or less, depending on the individual. Notice
whether your circle is comfortable for all parts. If not, draw the
circle wider until the part that needs the most space feels
comfortable. Next, draw the circle closer until the part that wants to
be closest to people feels comfortable. Notice the differences
between the original circles and the wider and closer ones.

Homework Sheet 32.3
Preparing to Set Boundaries in an Upcoming Situation
Choose an upcoming situation in which you will likely need to set a
boundary. Choose a situation that reflects the level of challenge for
which you feel ready.
1. Describe the situation.
2. What is the outcome of the boundary you would like to set?
3. Have an inner meeting in which you discuss the upcoming
situation with all parts of yourself. Following the step-by-step
approach in the section above on Helping Parts of Yourself
Cooperate to Set Healthy Boundaries and describe the responses of
parts of yourself to each step.
Reflect on the needs and desires of parts of yourself
regarding the boundary you want to set and describe them
below.
List any inner conflicts about setting the boundary.
List any dysfunctional core beliefs or thoughts about the
boundary and how you can respectfully challenge them.
Describe your attempts to negotiate empathically with all
parts about setting a limit or boundary, and their reactions.
Agree on which parts of you will set the boundary and
describe how parts of you reacted to this negotiation.

Help fearful, avoidant, or angry parts of yourself by
orienting to the present, discussing their fears or concerns,
taking into consideration their needs and wants, and offering
an inner safe space during the situation. Describe what you
were able to do, and how parts reacted.
Use imaginal rehearsal to envision yourself successfully
setting the boundary.
Practice forms of blending, if you are ready and able, to help
you set boundaries. Describe your experience of blending if
you were able to do so.

PART SEVEN
SKILLS REVIEW
You have learned a number of skills in this section of the manual.
Below you will find a review of those skills and an opportunity to
develop them further. As you review, we encourage you to return to
the chapters to read them again and repractice the homework a little
at a time. Remember that regular, daily practice is essential to learn
new skills.
For each skill set below, answer the following questions:
1. In what situation(s) did you practice this skill?
2. How did this skill help you?
3. What, if any, difficulties have you had in practicing this
skill?
4. What additional help or resources might you need to feel
more successful in mastering this skill?
Chapter 28, Finding Inner Common Ground About Relationships
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 28, Your Experience of Secure and Insecure
Relationships
1.
2.

3.
4.
Chapter 28, Balancing Auto- and Relational Regulation
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 29, Using Conflict Management Skills
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 30, Skills to Resolve Isolation and Loneliness
1.
2.
3.

4.
Chapter 31, Identifying Inner Conflicts That Prevent
Assertiveness
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 31, Preparing to Be Assertive in an Upcoming Situation
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 32, Identifying Your Personal Boundaries
1.
2.
3.
4.

Chapter 32, Your Personal Space and Optimal Level of Closeness
and Distance
1.
2.
3.
4.
Chapter 32, Preparing to Set Boundaries in an Upcoming
Situation
1.
2.
3.
4.

PART EIGHT
Guide for Group Trainers

CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE
Guide for Group Trainers
AGENDA
• Introduction
• Trainer Qualifications and Guidelines
• Assessment and Diagnosis of Potential Course Participants
• Contact and Coordination With the Treating Therapist
• Conducting Course Sessions
• Understanding and Resolving Difficulties in the Group
• Using the Manual in Individual Therapy
• Using the Manual in Day-Treatment and Inpatient Groups
Introduction
In this chapter we provide guidelines for using the manual in an
outpatient skills-training group, as well as in individual
psychotherapy for those patients who are not able to participate in a
group, or for whom a group is not available. A skills-training group
is not a replacement for individual psychotherapy, which is the
standard of care for those with dissociative disorders (ISSTD, in
press). However, the group can be a helpful adjunct when it is
highly structured and conducted by therapists who are experienced
in treating complex dissociative disorders.
Trainer Qualifications and Guidelines
Trainers for the course should be licensed mental health
professionals familiar with the current standard of care for
dissociative disorders, and they should have several years of
experience treating patients with complex dissociative disorders in
individual therapy. They should be able to set and maintain firm but
flexible therapeutic boundaries, maintain an empathic and
nonreactive stance in the face of intense emotionality and relational

disruptions with patients, and be willing to seek out consultation as
needed. Trainers should be able to distinguish between skills-
training and therapy-process groups, and they should maintain the
structure of the skills-training course. Furthermore, they should be
able to explain clearly the concept of dissociation and describe
dissociative symptoms and disorders, based not only on theoretical
knowledge but also on clinical experiences with patients.
We recommend that each course be led by two trainers. If
desired, a third mental health professional may serve as an assistant
or observer as part of an effort to train additional group leaders.
Such individuals may serve as a substitute in the absence of one of
the main trainers.
Division of Group Tasks Among Trainers
We suggest that two trainers alternate roles in the group to
familiarize themselves with all aspects of guiding the group. For
example, one trainer can discuss homework and exercises, while
the other gives the lecture for the week, and then exchange roles the
following week. Or perhaps trainers might choose to alternate roles
each month. If there is a third trainer or observer, who is not
actively engaged with the group in the moment, he or she may take
notes during the session regarding difficulties and successes of
group members with their homework and with group participation.
In the beginning of the course, the division of roles is explained to
all participants.
Although this is not a therapy group, relational dynamics will
invariably arise, and it is helpful for all participating trainers to be
aware of and able to address them briefly and then redirect the
group back to the course content.
We encourage trainers to work collaboratively, including any
observers. A silent observer may create a sense of unease and
distrust among course participants; thus, they are encouraged to
participate verbally, at least minimally. Participation of all trainers
and observers is generally welcomed by the group.
Assessment and Diagnosis of Potential Course
Participants
Course participants should include patients who are in outpatient
individual therapy and have been assessed for, diagnosed with, and

in current treatment for DID or DDNOS. We do not recommend
including individuals who have not received formal diagnostic
assessments for these disorders.
Diagnostic Assessment for Complex Dissociative Disorders
Prior to the course, a thorough assessment for a dissociative
disorder diagnosis should be conducted on any participants who
have not yet received one. This prevents the inclusion of patients
with a false-positive diagnosis who may not benefit from the
course. It also may confirm the diagnosis in many individuals in
whom it is suspected, and thus better guide their individual
treatment. The diagnosis should be made by a trained therapist,
using a structured clinical interview to assess the DSM dissociative
disorders, even if the patient has been, or is currently in treatment
for, the suspected disorder. Assessment may include the Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Dissociative Disorders, Revised
(SCID-D; Steinberg, 1994, 1995), the Dissociative Disorders
Interview Scale (DDIS; Ross, 1989; Ross et al.,1989); the Interview
for Dissociative Disorders and Trauma-Related Symptoms
(IDDTS; Boon, Draijer & Matthess, 2006), or the Multidimensional
Inventory for Dissociation (MID; Dell, 2002, 2006), along with
additional extensive and careful clinical interviewing and
observations.
A high score on the Dissociative Experiences Scale (DES;
Bernstein & Putnam, 1986) is not sufficient for accurate diagnosis,
because this is a screening instrument and includes many symptoms
experienced by healthy populations and not unique to those with a
dissociative disorder. The DES-Taxon (DES-T; Waller, Putnam, &
Carlson, 1996) is helpful in identifying serious levels of
dissociation, but it is not diagnostic either. The Somatoform
Dissociation Questionnaire (SDQ-20; Nijenhuis, Spinhoven, Van
Dyck, Van der Hart, & Vanderlinden, 1996) is another useful
screening instrument that is a brief self-report test measuring
somatoform dissociation.
Dissociative disorders should be distinguished from borderline,
psychotic, and bipolar disorders and their potential comorbid
existence. Additional psychological testing (for example, the
MMPI, Rorschach, the Schedler-Westen Assessment Procedure–
200 [SWAP] for personality disorders, and the Structured Clinical
Interview for DSM Personality Disorders [SCID-II]) is helpful in

determining comorbid disorders, but such testing is not specific for
dissociative disorders. If there is uncertainty about the diagnosis, it
is better to wait and allow the patient and therapist additional time
in individual therapy to gain more clarity before participation in the
course.
Inclusion Criteria for Participants
There are a number of inclusion criteria that should be met by
participants. All persons must meet the following conditions:
• Have a confirmed diagnosis of DDNOS or DID
• Be in current treatment with an individual therapist who is
addressing their dissociative disorder
•  Understand the basic concept of dissociation and how the
dissociative disorder affects their daily life
• Have sufficient realization of their dissociative disorder to be
able to acknowledge they have dissociative parts
• Have a relatively stable therapeutic alliance with their
individual therapist
• Be in the first phase of treatment, that is, stabilization,
symptom reduction, and skills training
• Or, if patients have begun the second phase, treatment of
traumatic memory, and have become overwhelmed, every
effort should be made to contain the memories and restabilize
the patient. At that point, patients may enter a skills group,
but they must not be working actively on traumatic memories
during this time, because the risk of destabilization is too
great.
• Attend their individual therapy sessions regularly and exhibit
a commitment to therapy
• Have clear goals in individual therapy regarding resolution of
their dissociation
• Not be actively psychotic
• Not be sociopathic or so severely disordered as to be
inappropriate for group therapy
• Be able to tolerate group interactions
• Be able to control switching during sessions, at least so it is
not disruptive to the group
• Not have pseudo-epileptic seizures during group
• Be able to use the manual and complete homework

assignments as tolerated
Additional Considerations for Choosing Participants
There are a number of other factors to consider when choosing
course participants.
Inclusion of the trainer’s patients in the course. Therapists who
are competent, experienced, and willing to treat complex
dissociative disorders are not always easy to come by. In many
areas there are only a few to be found. Thus, it may not be
uncommon for trainers to include some of their own patients in the
group. As with any group, including your own patients has its pros
and cons. The therapist is able to actively observe the patient’s
successes and difficulties with the material and can support him or
her more effectively in individual therapy. In addition, any conflicts
the patient has with other course members or group dynamics can
be addressed more effectively when the therapist has his or her own
experience of the course. The work done in group can be integrated
into the work in individual sessions.
However, the potential for problematic transference and
countertransference reactions is high. For example, the patient may
want his or her therapist’s exclusive attention, or a therapist may
tend to favor his or her patient over other course members. “Sibling
rivalry” transferences may arise more easily than when participants
have individual psychotherapy elsewhere. There is also a risk that
the therapist may inadvertently disclose information about the
patient in the course that should have remained in individual
therapy, thus breaching confidentiality.
Should any of these problems arise, they should always be
discussed in individual therapy sessions, not in the course sessions.
Some patients with intense and active transference may not be
helped by participating in a course led by their therapists. Prior to
the course, the individual therapist should always discuss with the
patient possible (and understandable) difficulties that might rise
from the therapist’s and patient’s different roles and relationships in
individual therapy versus a skills-training group, and how both can
best address the issues.
In individual therapy it is important to stress that feelings of
wanting to be special in the group or be protected by the individual
therapist are not bad or “crazy.” The patient need not feel ashamed
of these feelings and desires, which are important cues pointing to

the need for the development of secure attachment. The therapist
should explain that such feelings may be related to early attachment
difficulties, and that it is best to deal with them in individual
therapy rather than during course sessions. It should be clear that
acting out those feelings is not appropriate in group.
Axis I comorbidity. Most patients with dissociative disorders
have comorbid Axis I diagnoses. And some have a serious degree
of comorbidity that complicates treatment and needs attention prior
to participation in the course. For example, primary addictions, life-
threatening eating disorders, or severe depression or anxiety may
need medical and psychotherapeutic interventions before a patient
is sufficiently stable to attend a group.
Axis II comorbidity. Because early childhood trauma and
neglect affect the development of personality, many patients with a
dissociative disorder have coexisting DSM personality disorders.
These may be understood empathically as developmental
adaptations to extreme situations, but there are times when some of
the resulting behaviors may be inappropriate for a group setting.
Individuals who are excessively demanding of attention and time
during session, who easily regress, have intense transference
enactments, or who cannot maintain the course ground rules might
make better use of the manual in individual treatment. Individual
therapy should not only address the dissociative disorder but also
the personality disorder. It is imperative for course trainers to
maintain limits and boundaries and not tolerate disruptive behaviors
in session.
Timing of course participation. It is essential to consider the
timing of the course in the context of the patient’s current life
situation. Sometimes current life issues demand all the energy
available to an individual, and they may involve crises that
preclude participation in the course for the time being. For instance,
the presence of serious illness or loss; severe social, housing,
occupational, or financial problems; or current abusive
relationships may be indications that the timing of the group is not
right for the individual.
Lack of control over severe dissociative symptoms. People who
have no control over severe and disruptive dissociative symptoms,
such as pseudo-epileptic seizures or uncontrolled switching to
dysfunctional parts (for example, being in session as a child part
and subsequently unable to drive home), need further stabilization

prior to participating in the course. These behavioral symptoms are
often a sign of severe inner conflict among parts. The demands of
the course interactions and homework focused on dissociative parts
may be too overwhelming to the individual, and the behaviors may
be too disruptive for others in the course.
Dropping out and returning to the course at a later time.
Occasionally, group participation may go well for a period of time,
but an individual participant may eventually become overwhelmed.
In such cases, it is best to allow the participant to drop out and
restart a new course at a later time. For example, one individual
began to realize after 14 sessions that she had more dissociative
parts than she and her therapist had previously known. This
realization, along with the intrusion of new traumatic memories,
was overwhelming. The patient dropped out of the group, was
restabilized, and returned a year later to participate successfully in a
new course.
Repeating the course. As with other skills-training groups,
some participants may find it useful to repeat the course in order to
continue to practice essential skills. A number of patients to date
have reported that a first group allowed them to become more
familiar with the skills, and a second course supported more
focused work as they overcame more of their avoidance. For those
who have not had success, or had to drop out of a first group, the
trainers and individual therapist should collaboratively assess
whether a patient might benefit from a second try.
The Intake Session
Approximately 4 to 6 weeks prior to the start of the course, each
potential participant should meet with one or both of the trainers for
an intake assessment. If there are questions at that time about the
diagnosis of a dissociative disorder, a diagnostic evaluation should
be completed by a qualified clinician prior to the patient being
accepted for group. If there remain questions about whether the
group would be beneficial to the patient after an initial intake, a
second session may be scheduled for further evaluation.
In addition to assessing the patient for group, the trainer
describes the course, the format of each session, what is expected
from participants, the role of trainers, and gives the patient a
written copy of the ground rules (see appendix B). A release of
information form should be signed in order for the trainer and

therapist to speak together about the patient. If the course is part of
a research study, participants must give informed consent according
to the study protocol.
It is important to review the ground rules in detail with the
individual and determine whether he or she understands and is
willing to abide by them. The trainer explicitly states that the
individual is expected to participate actively in sessions, and to
complete and discuss homework assignments. If needed, the trainer
can discuss the differences between a skills-training course and
group psychotherapy, if the patient (or referring therapist) seems
confused.
It is important to ascertain whether the patient feels he or she
can arrive and leave each session safely and on time, and whether
talking about homework during sessions is possible. The trainer
should carefully explore the patient’s expectations and concerns
about the course. Unrealistic expectations and fears should be
discussed. If the patient has been in other skills-training groups, for
example, a dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) group, the trainer
should inquire about the outcome, what was helpful, and what was
difficult about the experience.
Potential problems that may emerge during the course can be
evaluated and discussed with the participant. For example, if the
patient has a history of switching to child or angry parts when
stressed, the trainer emphasizes that an adult part must be present in
the session and asks whether the patient feels it is possible to abide
by this limit. Likewise, if a patient has pseudo-seizures, the
therapist emphasizes that such episodes must not occur during the
session, or the patient will have to stop the group. If there is any
doubt about whether the patient has sufficient control, it is better to
wait and reassess him or her for another course at a later time. The
same decision might also be made if the patient is extremely fearful
of participating in a group setting.
Optimal Group Composition
The optimal number of participants is eight, with a maximum of
nine and a minimum of five per group. The majority of skills-based
groups have one or two dropouts during the first 3 months.
However, we do not advise beginning with 10 or more participants.
Dropouts may be prevented most effectively by conducting a
thorough assessment of potential participants and strictly adhering

to the inclusion criteria.
In general, the professional literature tends to encourage a
healthy balance among age, gender, sexual orientation,
socioeconomic status, and life experiences among group members,
but not to the degree that individuals might not fit in to a given
group. For example, having only one older group member may be
problematic in a group otherwise comprised of very young
participants, or a single male may have difficulty in a group of all
females, since life experiences may vary too widely for them to
relate well to each other.
But beyond these well-known group composition issues, there
are also special considerations specific to patients with dissociative
disorders. First, we recommend a balance between participants who
have DDNOS and those who have DID. There should at least be
two, and preferably three, participants who have the less prevalent
diagnosis in the group. For example, it may not be helpful for a
single patient with DDNOS to be in a group of patients with DID,
or vice versa. Although some experience of having parts is similar
in both diagnoses, there are also significant differences in the
interactions among parts in patients with DID, who may be far
more invested in keeping parts separate.
Second, there should be some balance among participants in
their degree of realization of the diagnosis and acknowledgment of
dissociative parts, as well as of their ability to communicate with
parts of themselves. For example, if the majority of patients avoid
accepting the diagnosis and dissociative parts of themselves, the
minority who has done so to a greater degree may feel they do not
belong in the group, and that too much time in group is spent on
acceptance of the diagnosis. Conversely, if a single patient has not
accepted his or her diagnosis while the rest of the group is much
farther along in their realization, this patient may feel like a failure
and drop out of group, or even decompensate.
Finally, any one individual’s level of functioning in the course
and in daily life may affect the group as a whole. For example, a
very high-functioning individual may not fit well with a group of
otherwise low-functioning participants, and vice versa. Trainers
may choose course participants on level of functioning, not pairing
extremes. For example, a group of patients who function at an
overall higher level should not include a very low-functioning
individual, and vice versa. Adaptive group mixes might include

higher and moderate levels of function, or moderate and lower
functioning patients. Axis II problems should be taken into
consideration as part of level of functioning. Patients who exhibit
extreme avoidance, narcissism, and aggression, for example, are
likely to disrupt and destabilize the group.
Contact and Coordination With the Treating
Therapist
Regular and consistent coordination between trainers and the
participants’ individual therapists is essential, after appropriate
informed consent has been obtained. The course work is demanding
and challenging, requiring regular practice by patients and
therapeutic troubleshooting by trainers and therapists to resolve
impasses, and therapists are encouraged to work actively with their
patients on the skills. Thus, participants need the coordinated
support of both trainers and therapists. It is also imperative that
splitting between trainers and therapists is prevented. We therefore
recommend that regular contact between therapists and trainers be
maintained. This may be done by telephone. Trainers are urged to
update therapists every few weeks on the progress of their patients,
at minimum, and most certainly should contact the therapist
immediately should any crisis develop. Likewise, therapists should
be asked to contact the trainers if any matter of importance
develops that may affect the participant in group.
If at all possible, we recommend an educational meeting for
therapists prior to the start of group to assist them in helping their
patients gain maximal benefit from the course. During this meeting,
trainers may hand out the dates of group meetings, a copy of the
ground rules and participant contract, and their contact details.
Likewise, trainers obtain contact information from the individual
therapists. Therapists are encouraged to have a copy of the manual
and to receive instruction on using it with their patients and on how
to help patients resolve roadblocks to successful practice of the
skills. Finally, they are given information on the structure of the
group sessions. Depending on the therapists’ skill level, educational
material may also be given on dissociative disorders, including a
copy of treatment guidelines for DID and DDNOS (ISSTD, in
press), information on upcoming trainings in the field, and contact
information for consultants and supervisors experienced in treating

dissociative disorders. Time should be provided for any questions
regarding the course, the manual, the structure of the group, and
concerns about potential difficulties for individual patients in the
group.
If desired, an additional meeting can occur midway through the
course and even after the course is completed. In fact, we
encourage therapists to get to know one another, and even meet
together for peer consultation and learning opportunities. After all,
treating patients with dissociative disorders is challenging and
sometimes even isolating and overwhelming. When therapists feel
supported by their colleagues, they are able to offer their best to
their patients.
Motivations of Referring Therapists
While most therapists will make an appropriate referral to the skills
group as an adjunct to an adequate individual psychotherapy, a few
will refer for other reasons. The trainer must be attuned to these
motivations and be able to address them. Some therapists who are
novices in the treatment of dissociative disorders simply become
overwhelmed in their good faith efforts to treat a patient and are
looking for relief afforded by the group. As long as such a therapist
is willing to continue with good training and supervision, this may
not be a problem, but the therapist cannot abdicate the treatment to
the course trainers.
However, as occasionally happens with referrals to specialty
groups, therapists who do not have sufficient training in the
specialty area (in this case, the treatment of dissociative disorders)
may attempt to refer patients to the group in order to avoid treating
the disorder. They may hold a mistaken belief that a patient’s
dissociative disorder may be treated separately from the rest of
therapy. Nothing could be further from the truth: Chronically
traumatized individuals need comprehensive, skilled, and integrated
treatment. This type of referral can have a potentially disastrous
outcome for the patient, who may be overwhelmed by material
from the group and subsequently cannot get adequate help from the
therapist. Therapists who lack training should be encouraged to
obtain training and supervision or to refer the patient to another
therapist who can treat appropriately. A skills group should never
be a substitute for comprehensive psychotherapy, and conversely,
the individual therapist must agree to incorporate skills training

and the group homework into the therapy.
Some therapists insist that they do treat patients with
dissociative disorders but work with dissociative parts as actual
“people,” overly focus on traumatic memories, or may be intensely
overinvolved with the patient. While the patient of such a therapist
may gain some helpful knowledge from the group, the likelihood of
a misguided therapy creating chaos and crisis for the patient and
splits between the trainers and therapist is great. Inclusion of
patients from such a therapist may have a negative effect on the
group and on the trainers.
Trainers should beware of attempting to “rescue” a patient from
a therapist by inviting the patient to join the group, as the well-
being of the group as a whole is a priority over the needs of any
single participant. Both the individual therapist and the trainers
should agree to abide by the most current treatment guidelines for
dissociative disorders.
In short, the course trainers should develop an impression of the
strengths and weaknesses of the potential group member
independent of the individual therapist, while taking into account
the many factors that may lead a therapist to refer a patient to the
course.
Conducting Course Sessions
In this section, trainers will find material relevant to leading group
sessions.
The Introductory Session
The introductory session (chapter 34) sets the stage for the course.
We suggest the session begin with introductions and an ice breaker
group exercise that is light, fun, and quick. For example, on a piece
of paper, trainers and participants trace their hands with fingers
spread. In one finger each, write in your age, hobby, music you
like, favorite animal, and one free choice. Or each person can fill in
the following sentence with a funny saying of a family member:
“My grandmother (or aunt, grandfather, brother, etc.) always
said . . .” (For example, “My grandmother always said you should
wear clean underwear in case you got in a car accident.”) During
this session, the general format, the goals of the course and all
ground rules (see appendix B) are discussed with the group.

Explanation of the educational meeting for significant others (see
section later in this chapter) is given. Participants sign their course
contract (see appendix C) during this session and have time to ask
questions about the course and ground rules.
Ground Rules
It is essential to set clear rules for the group and for all participants
to understand them. These rules are discussed in the interview prior
to being accepted for the course and are again discussed in this
introductory session. Many difficulties encountered in groups are
related to problems with ground rules and the course trainer’s
difficulties in maintaining them. The ground rules are found in
appendix B.
One rule is important to mention here in more detail. During
sessions participants are allowed to leave the room briefly and take
a short time-out (maximum of 10 minutes), should they feel the
need to do so in order to get grounded. They must announce to the
group that they are taking a brief time-out rather than leave the
room abruptly without notice. A trainer will not accompany them,
and the group will continue. They are expected to return to group of
their own accord within the 10-minute time frame. Should they
decide that finishing the session is not in their best interest, they
must at least return to the group to inform everyone that they are
going home and can do so safely. If a participant is not grounded by
the end of the session, the trainers should call an emergency contact
to come get the patient, or in a worst-case scenario, emergency
services can be contacted. It is essential that this rule is clear to all
participants and that they know trainers will not follow them out of
group, no matter how upset they may be. It can be difficult for both
the trainers and the participants to maintain this limit, but it is
essential for the ongoing stability of the group, and for patients to
learn to take responsibility for themselves.
Format of Course Sessions
The skills-training course has a highly structured format, which is
essential for the success of participants. Sessions should be held in
a room of sufficient size, where participants can meet without
undue interruptions. Sitting at a conference table is preferable to
sitting in a traditional group circle, because the seating structure
lends support to a training rather than a therapy format. Each

session is 1 hour and 45 minutes long, with a 15-minute break
between two 45-minute segments. The first segment begins with a
brief check-in and any announcements, followed by a discussion of
the homework and any questions about the topic from the previous
session.
During the 15-minute break, trainers leave the room and have a
chance to check in with each other about group process or any
concerns about individual participants. Following the break, time is
made for any questions about the previous part of the session. The
next 45 minutes are dedicated to explaining and discussing the new
topic and to practicing exercises, if applicable. Homework
assignments are explained so that all participants have a clear
understanding of what they need to work on during the week. The
last few minutes of the session should be dedicated to a wrap-up
with a check-out statement from each participant, or a short
grounding exercise or ritual to ensure all participants are in the
present and safe to leave. Trainers have the freedom to make small
changes in the structure, for instance, practicing exercises before
the break, but participants should be informed about changes.
Sessions should begin and end on time. It is best not to wait to start
the group if some participants are late.
Teaching the Skills Exercises
During the session, all exercises are explained and then practiced.
Participants are invited to take part in the exercise, but they are
never forced to do so, because pacing is essential. All participants
are encouraged to practice exercises at home or during their
individual therapy. They are supported in altering any exercise for a
better individual fit or to find other exercises that have the same
goal. Both trainers and participants should understand that what is
helpful for one individual (or for certain inner parts) may not be
helpful for another individual (or other inner parts). Thus, personal
creativity and flexibility are important in using any exercises to
learn skills. When participants are unable to practice an exercise,
they should be encouraged to write about or articulate what makes
it difficult for them and take those issues to individual therapy.
Teaching the Course Topics
After the mid-session break, one of the trainers discusses the new
topic. Trainers are encouraged not to read the material out loud;

rather, they should make the topic more relational and interactive.
This teaching style requires memorization and familiarity with all
aspects of the topic, and it will help participants remain more
present and engaged. Trainers may discuss key concepts and ideas,
and clarify details. The use of gentle humor, interesting anecdotes,
slides, or short movie clips are great ways to make the topics more
entertaining and thus better hold the attention of participants.
Caution should be used in sharing anecdotes about other patients,
because participants may feel it is a breach of confidentiality, thus
affecting their trust in the trainers. Any case material should be
discussed only in generic form.
It is important to create an atmosphere in which asking
questions is safe, that is, where any question is allowed, as long as
it is on topic. And even though the material is covered during
session, it is especially important to encourage participants to read
and reread the material themselves so they can better integrate it.
If trainers do not feel secure enough in their knowledge of the
material, they may read out loud to the group from time to time. In
that case they should stop after every paragraph or so and check to
see whether participants are grounded and understand the material,
inviting them to ask questions, make comments, or give their own
examples. Listening to someone read can induce trance and can
trigger dissociation, especially because there often is a phobia for
the content of the topic. Therefore, this teaching method is not
ideal, and trainers should make strenuous efforts to learn the
material sufficiently to make discussions highly interactive.
Homework
Homework assignments are a central part of the training course,
because consistent practice is the tried and true way to learn new
skills. Although participants are asked and expected to complete the
assignments in writing and bring them in for the next session as
best they are able, there should not be negative consequences or
punishments for failing to do so. Many traumatized individuals are
afraid to fail and have long histories of severe punishments when
they do not do as asked. There are many reasons why an individual
may not complete homework. These include fear of the topic,
shame, general avoidance, confusion, feeling overwhelmed, and
occasionally, the homework topic may not be relevant to the
person’s experience. The reasons for not completing homework

should be a topic of individual therapy, and if needed, course
trainers may also help the participant overcome these obstacles. But
failure to do homework should be addressed, because its
completion is an expected part of participation, and avoidance is
endemic in people with dissociative disorders. Regardless of
whether a participant has done the homework, it is vital for him or
her to participate actively during the sessions.
Each participant should share his or her homework assignments
from time to time in group. For many, the very act of sharing is a
frightening risk that can be safely taken during the course. Those
who are highly avoidant and afraid to talk should receive support to
overcome their phobia. Sharing is often minimal at first, but a
gradually developed sense of safety and shared experiences
supports more active participation on a regular basis. When a
participant is chronically silent, tension builds within the group,
and trust becomes an issue.
Educational Meeting for Significant Others
During the course, usually after eight or nine sessions, an
educational meeting is organized for relatives, partners, or friends,
that is, significant others of the participants. The purpose is for
significant others to learn about complex dissociative disorders, and
the goals of the course, and to have their general questions about
the disorders answered. Thus, participants may receive more
appropriate support in their relationships. Usually the meeting is
held in the evening, or perhaps on a weekend, at a time when most
people might be able to attend.
Prior to the meeting, trainers discuss the goals and contents of
this meeting with all participants during a course session, invite
them to mention themes they would like to have addressed during
the meeting, and encourage them to discuss their expectations and
concerns. For example, participants may want their partners to
know how to respond appropriately when they are switching or are
not grounded in the present. And trainers may want to explain, for
example, that ongoing interactions with child parts without
engaging adult parts of the person, or treating parts as though they
are separate people, are detrimental to healing.
Although it is not obligatory, participants are strongly advised
to attend the meeting with their significant others. Trainers state
clearly that personal details will not be discussed and personal

questions should not be asked: The content will remain general.
Ending the Course
The last two sessions of the course focus on leave taking and
include a summary evaluation of the course by participants. In the
first of these two sessions, participants discuss their homework
from the previous session as usual before the break. Following the
break, trainers support the group in developing their own leave-
taking ritual. There are many options for rituals, limited only by the
creativity and wishes of the group. For example, each participant
might buy or make a card and write something for each group
member on it. Each person in the group might say something
positive about the other group members. Participants might write
down or verbally share the most important things they will take
away from the course and from being with others who have similar
experiences. Each person might write a note to each individual,
indicating their wishes for the future for him or her. Some might
prefer to celebrate with food. The group trainers might give small
colored stones or another meaningful memento to each participant.
The first part of the last session is dedicated to the evaluation of the
course, and during the second part of this session, participants have
their leave-taking ritual and the group is ended.
If the trainers think it useful, they may schedule a follow-up
session 8 to 12 weeks after the end of the group. During this session
participants once more look back on the course and what they have
learned, share how they have been able to use their skills in the past
months, and garner support to continue work on the skills with
which they still struggle. Trainers reinforce the need for regular
practice of exercises and continued work until skills are mastered.
Understanding and Resolving Difficulties in the
Group
Following are some common difficulties that arise during the group
and which should be addressed directly. When problems in the
group are left unacknowledged, tensions and mistrust build, so it is
imperative to address them early and firmly.
Participants Who Talk Too Little or Too Much
In most groups there are participants who are relatively silent and

find it painful to talk or discuss their homework. And there are
other participants who talk too much, interrupting others, or losing
themselves in prolonged, detailed, and off-topic ramblings. During
the intake session, it is important to emphasize that everyone is
expected to discuss homework and participate actively, and that
there are time limits so that each participant can have a turn. But
even when these guidelines have been emphasized, the issues of
talking too little or too much inevitably arise during the course.
Trainers should take an active role in ensuring that every
participant is able to reflect on the quality of his or her own
participation in the course, and to empathically but firmly set limits
with those who cannot maintain themselves with the group
guidelines. If a participant is talking too much or is too silent, and
this behavior is disruptive to the group and cannot be changed, the
individual therapist of the participant should be contacted to discuss
whether the course is appropriate for the patient.
Participants Who Discuss Inappropriate Content
Even though group guidelines explicitly state that participants
should avoid discussing material that is intense or provocative,
invariably a participant will share a homework example or bring up
a topic that is not appropriate for the group. This may lead to
dysregulation in other course participants. Although the individual
may not realize the effect of the content of his or her sharing on
other participants, trainers should intervene immediately.
For example, a participant was discussing shame. She described
how she had been very suicidal during the past week and had felt so
ashamed that she had called her young adult son for help to prevent
a suicide attempt. Tension in the participants rose not only because
they were triggered as she shared her extreme suicidal tendencies
but also because they were concerned for the young adult son upon
whom they felt she relied inappropriately. Trainers intervened and
told her that it was helpful for her to speak about her inner
experience of feeling ashamed, but the content of the example was
best discussed in her individual therapy, not in the session. Trainers
also validated the experiences of the other participants and closed
the discussion, advising all participants to take the subject to their
individual therapy if they felt the need for further attention to the
matter. In the next session the individual apologized, saying that
she realized she should not involve her son in such situations and

that she was developing better ways of coping with her individual
therapist. The group was relieved and could move on.
Participants Who Are Unable to Stay Present
It is especially challenging for patients with a dissociative disorder
to stay present while they are discussing their disorder and its
consequences and implications. Thus, difficulties staying present
are endemic to this course. In particular, attention may lag during
the second segment of the session following the break. This may be
related to avoiding content but also because it is difficult for
patients to maintain being present for long periods of time, and they
easily tire after the first half of the group. In the beginning of the
course, it is helpful for the trainers to explain this possibility and
that they will offer a direct intervention once to help a participant
get grounded in the present. However, if the participant continues
to lose contact with the present, space out, or seems preoccupied
internally after the intervention, the trainers should move on with
the session, with the expectation that the participant will manage to
return on his or her own. Episodes of not being fully present may
last from several minutes to a greater part of the session. When this
is a repeated issue during session, or if a participant is unable to be
grounded enough to leave and go home at the end of session, the
course trainers should contact the individual therapist to discuss
whether the patient is able to continue with the course.
Participants Who Are Chronically Late
Chronic lateness may be the result of avoidance, dissociation, and
inner conflict, or of executive dysfunction involving time
management. Often it is a combination of all these factors. When a
participant is late, the trainers should address it immediately and
ask the individual to find a solution. If the problem is one of
avoidance, the patient should work on a solution in individual
therapy. One participant solved her lateness caused by severe inner
conflict by having a friend drive her to session temporarily. There
are a number of ways to learn to manage time more adequately (see
chapter 10 on time management). If lateness continues to be a
problem, the course trainers should discuss with the individual
therapist whether the participant should leave the course.
Participants Who Must Drop Out Prematurely

It is never easy to make the decision for a participant to drop out of
the course. However, it is essential to stick to the course guidelines
and minimize disruptions during sessions. Patients should also be
protected from overwhelming experiences in the group if they are
ill equipped to handle them. A decision is ideally made jointly with
the trainers in consultation with the individual therapist. When a
decision has been made, the course trainers should speak to the
participant privately, and in the next session, explain what has
happened to the other participants. There may be times when it is
appropriate for the participant to return briefly at the beginning of
the next group to say goodbye, but this should not involve
processing what happened.
The remaining participants may have strong feelings about the
trainers’ decision, ranging from relief to anger, from a feeling of
being cared for, to betrayal. Although this is a training course, there
should be at least some room for discussing these feelings in the
group setting. However, the discussion should focus on group
safety and moving forward. Once participants have had their
feelings acknowledged, they should be asked to take the issue to
their individual therapist, so the course can continue.
There are several common reasons for asking a group member
to leave. These include seriously disruptive behaviors in session
such as pseudo-seizures; uncontrolled switching; inappropriate
anger outbursts or disrespect of trainers or group members; threat
of violence to self or others; self-harm during sessions (for
instance, head banging); inability to stay grounded and get home
safely; attending group under the influence of drugs or alcohol;
bringing a weapon to session; and prolonged absences (including
hospitalization).
The longer a participant has been actively and cooperatively
present as a group member the more difficult it is for all parties to
accept a decision for him or her to leave the group, regardless of the
rules. However, most participants are eventually able to
acknowledge their relief that the trainers are protective of the
group.
Participants Who Object to the Ground Rules
When a participant clearly and openly objects to ground rules in the
intake session and is unwilling to sign the contract, he or she should
not be included in the course. However, participants may challenge

ground rules at some point during the course, and this must be
addressed immediately. Often this revolves around episodes in
which one or more participants feel the rules are too rigid or
applied unfairly, or they should be excepted for a “special”
circumstance. Although a degree of flexibility is important, it is
equally important that course trainers maintain the frame of the
group by keeping the ground rules. These guidelines have been
developed over time and with experience, and they can be relied
upon to be reasonable and effective.
As an example, a participant began a discussion about the rule
that trainers do not follow a participant who leaves the session to
take a time-out, no matter how upset the participant may be. This
individual stated that if the trainers did not follow a participant, she
would do so herself, because it was irresponsible to allow a person
who was upset to leave the session by himself or herself. The
course trainers explained that participants are responsible for
themselves and that being overwhelmed or triggered is part of
every participant’s daily life, and thus it is a situation with which
they have to learn to cope. The trainers also explained that they
could not follow eight or nine participants if everyone decided to
take a time-out simultaneously. All other participants understood
this clearly. The participant who had brought up the issue was told
that she could reconsider during the coming week whether she was
able to participate with the ground rules as they stood, and if not,
she should not continue. She decided to sign the contract and
successfully completed the course.
Contact Between Sessions
There are several issues regarding contact between sessions. First,
there is an expectation that participants in crisis should contact their
individual therapist according to their set protocol, and not contact
the group leaders. Either participants or trainers may initiate contact
if there is an issue regarding the group that needs to be addressed
outside the session. For example, one participant felt another was
being too aggressive and asked for the help of trainers to set more
limits. In turn, they helped her take a risk to be more assertive and
speak up about the issue in group. Another was having severe
flashbacks and needed a week to rest, and called to inform the
trainers.
Contact among participants outside the course is not

encouraged. There are situations in which patients with the same
issues can be of support to one another, but the inherent risks often
outweigh the benefits in the case of individuals with a dissociative
disorder. They often have difficulties with setting appropriate
boundaries and being assertive, are easily dysregulated, and have
particular difficulties in managing relationships and relational
conflicts. Cliques and interpersonal conflict among participants
outside the group can be a destructive force within it.
Group trainers have the discretion to make course participation
contingent on not having contact with other participants outside of
group. Most trainers promote this stance. That said, some trainers
do not make an issue of it, and participants do choose to have
contact. If so, the possible ramifications should be discussed
thoroughly both in their individual therapies and with the group,
and the potential effect on the group explored extensively. Often
contact is initiated before either participant has thought through the
possible consequences: A discussion of the issue beforehand may
lend a prudent cautiousness. Furthermore, the entire group of
participants should know if some are having outside contact;
otherwise it becomes a secret.
If contact between sessions leads to problems for one or more
participants, they should take the issues to their respective
therapists. If contact leads to group problems, it must cease
immediately in all forms, that is, e-mail, texting, phone calls, social
networking sites, and face-to-face meetings.
Using the Manual in Individual Therapy
The manual can be easily adapted to use in individual therapy when
a patient is unable to take part in a group, or one is not available.
The manual can be used in a highly structured format, such that
therapy sessions are replaced by skills training for a period of time.
However, most therapists will likely prefer a more unstructured
approach, using it for periodic skills training, alternated with
psychotherapy sessions. In this way, the manual can be helpful for
patients in different phases of their individual therapy, not only in
the stabilization phase. For instance, themes on emotions, anger,
and shame can be revisited in all phases of treatment.
As with course participants, individuals should not use the
manual unless they have been formally diagnosed with either

DDNOS or DID. If the therapist is unsure, he or she should request
a second opinion from an experienced colleague prior to using the
manual with a patient. The manual should not be introduced
immediately when a patient begins therapy. A stable alliance,
establishment of safety, therapy frame, and treatment goals, in
conjunction with thorough assessment, should occur first. Likewise,
when a patient is first diagnosed with a dissociative disorder, he or
she usually experiences a period of disequilibrium during which the
manual should not be introduced. The patient and therapist must
first explore thoroughly the meaning of the diagnosis to the patient
and learn how the patient will cope. The patient should attend
therapy regularly and should have a modicum of acceptance of the
diagnosis and of dissociative parts before the manual is introduced.
Structured Use of the Manual
Once a reasonable therapeutic alliance is established and the patient
regularly attends individual sessions, the manual can be used in a
structured manner just as in the group. The therapist begins with the
first theme (on dissociation) and systematically works through the
entire manual with the patient, at his or her own pace. At home, the
patient should read the topics, complete homework, and discuss
successes and difficulties during individual sessions. This
structured approach is recommended for those patients who are in
greater need of skills in order to function in daily life.
The therapist may choose to alternate skills-training sessions
with those focused on crisis intervention and stabilization, or the
therapist may dedicate half of a session to skills training, while the
other half is reserved for other issues. Some patients may find that
two sessions a week are helpful, with one focused on skills and one
on other issues. Beware of the situation in which a patient is in such
chronic crisis that there is never time to discuss and practice skills.
This is a trap for both patient and therapist, and it should be
vigorously addressed and resolved.
Unstructured Use of the Manual
Higher functioning patients may not need the rigorous structure
required by lower functioning individuals. They may choose
chapters that are most relevant. Patient and therapist should discuss
which topics are most helpful, and in what order. For instance,
some patients are well aware of their dissociative symptoms and

parts and thus have no need for the education offered in the first
four chapters. Rather, they might better profit from learning how to
improve sleep or cope with particularly difficult emotions.
Virtually all patients will benefit from the chapters on learning to
overcome the phobia of dissociative parts, learning to reflect,
developing an inner sense of safety, and the window of tolerance.
Using the Manual in Day-Treatment and Inpatient
Groups
Specific chapters of the manual may be used to organize short-term
skills groups in day-treatment and inpatient programs. For example,
a basic educational group could benefit from the first chapters on
diagnosis and symptoms. A life-skills group could utilize the
chapters on daily structure, healthy eating and sleeping, and use of
leisure and free time. An emotion skills group could use the
chapters on reflecting and the window of tolerance, and those on
specific emotions. A cognitive-based group might use the ones on
core beliefs and dysfunctional thoughts.
In conclusion, trainers will be most successful if they carefully
select group participants, maintain the ground rules, and quickly
address problems that may arise in the group. Trainers are
encouraged to get regular consultation for themselves, because
many complex issues are likely to arise over the course of the
group, particularly regarding relational conflicts, boundaries, and
impasses.

CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR
Introductory Session
AGENDA
• Introduction of trainers and participants (use an ice breaker
exercise of your own choosing and provide participants and
trainers with name badges)
Explanation of Ground Rules (see appendix B)
How to Make the Most of the Skills-Training Course
Educational Meeting for Significant Others
• Signing of contracts (see appendix C)
• Questions
• Homework
Reread the chapter.
Read chapter 1.
Notice how you felt in this first session and whether
you have any concerns. Feel free to bring up questions
or concerns at the beginning of the next session.
Explanation of Ground Rules (Appendix B)
Trainers should cover the ground rules in detail. It is helpful to read
them out loud and also make sure all participants have a written
copy in addition to their skills training manual. All participants
must agree to abide by these guidelines.
How to Make the Most of the Skills-Training Course
• Make strong efforts to focus on what is happening in each
session. Concentrate on the present, not the past or future,
and on the conversation, not what is going on in your head.

• Take responsibility for your own behavior, even though it
may feel out of your control.
• Encourage all parts of yourself to participate.
• Learn to listen to others without interrupting. Let a person
completely finish what he or she is saying before you begin
to speak.
• Be specific and give feedback directly to participants and
trainers. Describe what you observe and feel. Make “I”
statements, rather than “you” statements (for instance, “I feel
confused by what you are saying,” rather than “You never
make any sense”). Avoid pointing fingers or the use of
blaming or shaming statements. If you have a disagreement,
please stay with the present topic. Avoid going back to
discuss other issues from the past (for instance, “I felt
intimidated when you spoke so loudly and interrupted me just
now” rather than “You are a bully. In the last two sessions
you talked over other people”). Also think about how you
would want to be given the same feedback you are giving to
others. The idea is to be constructive rather than hostile or
rejecting.
• Indicate you have heard feedback that you receive from
fellow participants or trainers (repeat what you have heard).
Ask for clarification if there is something you do not
understand. Do not try to defend yourself: Everyone is here
to learn and to help each other in their learning. You do not
have to agree with the feedback; just listen and think about it.
• Experiment often with new behaviors you have learned in the
course. Practice is the one thing that helps most when
learning new skills.
• Regularly review your goals for taking this course.
• Be patient and do not lose heart! A dissociative disorder is a
chronic disorder; it takes time and hard work to change, and
change will continue long after the final session if you are
willing to continue practicing what you have learned. But
most certainly, change can occur!
Educational Meeting for Significant Others
People with a complex dissociative disorder have a strong tendency
to conceal their diagnosis and problems from others. They may

actually have an inner prohibition about discussing the subject, or
they may be deeply ashamed or afraid to talk about it. But it is
difficult to change yourself alone. You need people who will help
you to practice and strengthen the skills that you are learning,
people you can trust to aid you in distinguishing which skill you
need in a given situation. This may be a partner, a friend, a relative,
or some other person you trust, at least to a degree.
You certainly do not need to share that you have dissociative
problems with everyone, but we urge you to share important
aspects of your current dissociative difficulties and what you are
learning in this course with at least one person. Your individual
therapist can help you decide what to share and the best way to do
so. We recommend that you find at least one person with whom
you can talk about what you are learning in this course and whom
you would like to invite to the educational meeting. Again, this is
strongly recommended, but not mandatory.
You may share manual materials regarding the skills with your
support person if you choose. Together with the people who are
important to you, you can work out how they may support you in
putting these skills into practice and perhaps even help you to
return to the present when you are spacing out or switching. It is
important that you not feel so alone. And it can be of great help and
relief for the people around you to understand a bit more about
what happens for you.
You should not expect your support person(s) to have unlimited
availability or to always take care of you in an emotional crisis. It is
generally not desirable for them to become fascinated by various
parts of you, treat them as separate people, or become especially
attached to certain parts. Both you and your support person should
treat you as a whole person as much as possible.
Please list the names of the people you would like to invite to
the educational meeting. (This is just for you; you need not show it
to anyone else.)
Name
Telephone Number
1. { . . . } { . . . }
2. { . . . } { . . . }
3. { . . . } { . . . }
4. { . . . } { . . . }

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE
Leave-Taking Sessions
Leave-taking will begin in the second half of the session following
chapter 32. Following the homework discussion and break, trainers
will present a very short topic on the importance of saying
goodbye, and the group will decide together on a leave-taking
ritual.
In the final session, participants will partake in the leave-taking
ritual and complete the course.
AGENDA
• Welcome and reflections on previous session (chapter 32)
• Homework discussion
• Break
• Short topic: Saying Goodbye
Introduction
Saying Goodbye
Leave-Taking Rituals
Evaluation of the Course
• Homework
Complete Homework Sheet 35.1, Saying Goodbye to
the Group.
Complete Group Evaluation (optional; see appendix
D).
Introduction
Saying goodbye, or leave taking, is an inevitable and normal part of
life. But precisely because it is unavoidable, it is important to learn
how to have a good experience in saying goodbye to someone else.

Yet many people avoid it as much as possible because it does
sometimes involve painful, sad, or disappointed feelings. You have
been working hard to improve your ability to tolerate feelings and
decrease your avoidance, so hopefully you are in a better position
to cope with what comes up for you as you say goodbye to the
participants and trainers. As you come to the end of this course, be
sure to use the skills you have learned to help yourself. The
importance of leave taking is discussed next.
Saying Goodbye
It is time to say goodbye. You have come to know other people in
this group, some more and some less, but nevertheless, you have
been united together in your struggle with difficult problems, with
your suffering, and with your intentions to work toward healing.
These are important commonalities, even though you each may be
quite different from the other in many ways. You have risked
sharing a bit more of yourselves with each other—not an easy feat!
This has created a bond among you, even though you may have had
conflicts or disagreements with each other from time to time. That
is normal and part of growing relationships. You have worked hard
to understand and empathize with each other. You should
congratulate yourselves on this important work that you have
accomplished as a group. And your sense of being connected with
each other makes saying goodbye difficult.
The aim of this course was for you to learn new skills and
information that will help you cope better in life, to deal with your
problems more adaptively, and to develop more inner empathy,
communication, and cooperation. But we also hope you have
learned more about how you related to the different people in the
group.
Although there is no one right way to say goodbye, there are
some general guidelines that are helpful. For example, as you are
saying goodbye, reflect on what you have received that is positive
or growth-producing in the relationship (in this case, your
relationship with the trainers and participants in the group). Even if
every relationship is not the best, you likely learned some helpful
things about yourself and other people along the way.
Consider what the course itself has meant to you. And you can
be aware not only of the positive aspects of the group but also the

negative or disappointing ones; after all, no one, and no group, is
perfect. It is likely that you had hopes for this course that perhaps
were not fully realized. These are important to acknowledge and
accept. You can, if you like, share these positive and negative
experiences with the group in a nonjudgmental way.
It will also be helpful to be aware of what you will miss about
the group, and what various parts of you feel about leave taking. It
is helpful if you reflect on ways to use your course experience to
help yourself move forward into the future. Imagine taking in the
group as an inner “cheering section” who encourages you in your
mind as you continue to learn and practice new skills and work on
your problems. Pay attention to what you have learned and what
skills you wish to develop further, so you can continue your
progress. It is important to find a balance between positive feelings
and sadness or disappointment, and an understanding of how you
might continue to make healing gains after the group has ended,
taking what you have learned forward with you.
Most important, do your best to stay present and notice your
inner experience as you engage in leave taking with the group.
Perhaps you have never been able to experience a positive leave
taking, or perhaps you have found it difficult to stay present in the
past. Notice your thoughts, core beliefs, feelings, sensations, and
urges. Each of these can help you learn more about how you and
other parts of you react to saying goodbye. You can bring those
issues to your individual therapy to get further help. In the
meantime, savor your time with these people with whom you have
walked side by side during part of your long journey.
Leave-Taking Rituals
You, along with your group, will decide what leave-taking ritual
you prefer to use in your final session together next week. There
are countless rituals, limited only by the constraints of your
creativity and time. Perhaps some members in the group have some
to propose. Next we offer a few suggestions, but you are not
obligated to use them.
Suggestions for Leave-Taking Rituals
• You may consider (depending on the rules of the location in

which you have group) bringing food to celebrate.
• You may bring music on which the entire group agrees.
• Bring in a memento of what the group has meant to you, for
example, a stone, a small figure, a picture, a flower, or
something else from nature. The group may decide to use the
same kind of memento for each person, which the trainers or
a group member agrees to bring. Mementos should be small
and very inexpensive, if they cost anything.
• Each person passes his or her memento around the group.
Each person holds the memento in his or her hands, imbuing
their good energy into the object for the other to take home.
You may say something to the participant as his or her
memento is passed around, or you may be silent. You may
choose music for this part of the ritual, if you like.
• You may write a card for every group member and trainer
with a personal note that you do not need to share in group.
• If you use flowers, each person can put his or hers into a
single vase until all flowers together make a bouquet,
representing the group, and also the increased cooperation
and communication among all parts of each person present.
Evaluation of the Course
Trainers are encouraged to obtain feedback from group participants
in order for group members to be heard, as well as to gather
valuable suggestions to improve the next course. We have included
an evaluation in appendix D. You may use it, or another one of
your preference. The evaluation should be given out in this session
and brought back the following session. Evaluations can certainly
be anonymous if participants choose, or they are welcome to add
their names. Trainers can learn much from the feedback they
receive.

Homework Sheet 35.1
Saying Goodbye to the Group
During the week, take some time to write a short note to each
member in the group, expressing something you appreciate about
that person, and something you wish for him or her in the future.
Bring in what you have written for the final session. You may make
other remarks as well, if you like.
• What I especially appreciate about you is . . .
• My wish for you in the future is . . .
• Other remarks
Suggestions. You are encouraged to use your creativity to make
this ritual fit your needs. Thus, you accomplish this project in the
way that feels right for you. There is no right or wrong way to do it.
Whether you use a simple piece of note paper or make something
more elaborate, the details are not important; your sentiments and
intentions are. If you do not feel you can write something, you
might bring something that represents your thoughts and feelings,
such as a picture or small memento. If you wish to do something
more elaborate, you might consider the following:
• Drawing or painting something
• Making a collage
• Writing a poem or story
• Making a CD of music or songs
• Recalling a meaningful, warm, or funny moment you shared
with the other person in group
Final Session
AGENDA
• Welcome
• Turn in evaluations (if used)
• Reflections on your experience in group and on moving

forward
• Break (if needed)
• Leave-taking ritual
• Closing
There is no didactic portion of this ending session. Trainers and
group members should structure it according to the desires and
needs of the group as a whole. Some groups have brought in food
or music, with a more celebratory feel to the session, while others
have had a more somber, reflective session. Your group will decide
together what is best.
Final Note From the Authors
We congratulate you for the hard work you have done over the
course of this training. Please do not be discouraged if you did not
accomplish everything you wished. The skills in this manual can be
very difficult and time consuming to practice and learn. It is quite
normal for you to need more time in therapy to continue on with
what you have begun to grasp here. Dissociative disorders tend to
be chronic and can take awhile to resolve. But each of us has seen
many patients who have indeed healed and moved on to have
fruitful and stable lives. We wish you all the best on your continued
journey: strength, self-respect, courage, love, laughter, rest, and
healing.
Suzette Boon
Kathy Steele
Onno van der Hart

APPENDIX A
DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria
Dissociative Identity Disorder (DID)
A. The presence of two or more distinct identities or personality states
(each with its own relatively enduring pattern of perceiving,
relating to, and thinking about the environment and self).
B. At least two of these identities or personality states recurrently take
control of the person’s behavior.
C.  Inability to recall personal information that is too extensive to be
explained by ordinary forgetfulness.
D. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., blackouts or chaotic behavior during Alcohol
Intoxication) or a general medical condition (e.g., complex partial
seizures). Note: In children, the symptoms are not attributable to
imaginary playmates or other fantasy play. (APA, 1994, p. 487)
Dissociative Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
(DDNOS), Subtype 1b
This category is included for disorders in which the predominant feature is a
dissociative symptom (i.e., a disruption in the usually integrated functions of
consciousness, memory, identity, or perception of the environment) that does not
meet the criteria for any specific dissociative disorder. DDNOS, Subtype 1b is
described as follows:
1.   Clinical presentations similar to Dissociative Identity Disorder
that fail to meet full criteria for this disorder. Examples
include presentations in which a) there are not two or more
distinct personality states, or b) amnesia for personal
information does not occur [italics added]. (APA, 1994, p.
490)
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
A. The person has been exposed to a traumatic event in which both of
the following were present:
(1) the person experienced, witnessed, or was confronted with an
event or events that involved actual or threatened death or

serious injury, or a threat to the physical integrity of self or
others
(2) the person’s response involved intense fear, helplessness, or
horror. Note: In children, this may be expressed instead by
disorganized or agitated behavior.
B. The traumatic event is persistently reexperienced in one (or more)
of the following ways:
(1) recurrent and intrusive distressing recollections of the event,
including images, thoughts, or perceptions. Note: In young
children, repetitive play may occur in which themes or aspects
of the trauma are expressed.
(2) recurrent distressing dreams of the event. Note: In children,
there may be frightening dreams without recognizable content.
(3) acting or feeling as if the traumatic event were recurring
(includes a sense of reliving the experience, illusions,
hallucinations, and dissociative flashback episodes, including
those that occur on awakening or when intoxicated). Note: In
young children, trauma-specific reenactment may occur.
(4) intense psychological distress at exposure to internal or
external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the
traumatic event
(5) physiological reactivity on exposure to internal or external cues
that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event
C. Persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the trauma and
numbing of general responsiveness (not present before the
trauma), as indicated by three (or more) of the following:
(1) efforts to avoid thoughts, feelings, or conversations associated
with the trauma
(2) efforts to avoid activities, places, or people that arouse
recollections of the trauma
(3) inability to recall an important aspect of the trauma
(4) markedly diminished interest or participation in significant
activities
(5) feeling of detachment or estrangement from others
(6) restricted range of affect (e.g., unable to have loving feelings)
(7) sense of a foreshortened future (e.g., does not expect to have a
career, marriage, children, or a normal life span)
D. Persistent symptoms of increased arousal (not present before the
trauma), as indicated by two (or more) of the following:
(1) difficulty falling or staying asleep
(2) irritability or outbursts of anger
(3) difficulty concentrating
(4) hypervigilance
(5) exaggerated startle response
E. Duration of the disturbance (symptoms in Criteria B, C, and D) is
more than 1 month.
F. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
(APA, 1994, pp. 427–429)

Complex Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (CPTSD) or
Disorders of Extreme Stress Not Otherwise
Specified (DESNOS)
This proposed disorder is not included in the DSM-IV. However, some of its
symptoms are included in the DSM-IV under “Associated descriptive features and
mental disorders” of PTSD (APA, 1994). The DSM-IV states that this
“constellation of symptoms may occur and are more commonly seen in
association with an interpersonal stressor (e.g., childhood sexual abuse or physical
abuse, domestic battering, being taken hostage, incarceration as a prisoner of war
or in a concentration camp, torture)” (APA, 1994, p. 435).
A. Alterations in regulating affective arousal
(1) chronic affect dysregulation
(2) difficulty modulating anger
(3) self-destructive and suicidal behavior
(4) difficulty modulating sexual involvement
(5) impulsive and risk-taking behaviors
B. Alterations in attention and consciousness
(1) amnesia
(2) dissociation
C. Somatization
D. Chronic characterological changes
(1) alterations in self-perception: chronic guilt and shame; feelings
of self-blame, of ineffectiveness, and of being permanently
damaged
(2) alterations in perception of perpetrator: adopting distorted
beliefs and idealizing the perpetrator
(3) alterations in relations with others:
(a) an inability to trust or maintain relationships with others
(b) a tendency to be revictimized
(c) a tendency to revictimize others
E. Alterations in systems of meaning
(1) despair and hopelessness
(2) loss of previously sustaining beliefs (Herman, 1992; Van der
Kolk, 1996)
Note: The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM) is continually evolving. A new DSM-V edition is slated to
be published in 2013. The criteria for dissociative disorders and
PTSD will likely change at that time, at least to a degree.

APPENDIX B
Ground Rules for a Skills-Training Group
• Regular attendance is essential for you to gain the greatest benefit from
the sessions. If for some reason you cannot be present, call (phone #) { .
. . } as soon as possible and ask for your trainer, leave a message with
the secretary, or leave a voice mail. You are not obliged to give a reason
for your absence but we would appreciate it if you did. If you miss three
consecutive sessions or five sessions in total, you cannot continue in the
course.
• Complete your homework assignments for every session so you can
participate in sessions and learn the skills offered in this course. Please
complete them in writing, using the spaces provided in your manual and
bring them to each session. Your assignments will not be read by others
in the course unless you choose to share, and they will remain your
personal property.
• This course is designed to help you master specific skills. It is not a
substitute for individual therapy. This course has two objectives: (1) to
educate you about dissociation and other trauma-related problems; (2) to
help you learn skills that will improve your ability to handle your
difficulties. Thus, it is not a goal of this course to explore your personal
past and the causes of your dissociative disorder. We expect participants
to avoid discussing details of their past or details of their therapy work
with other participants, whether inside or outside session, because such
information may be upsetting to others, and/or to you. Continue to work
in your therapy as usual during the course and feel free to take issues
from the course to discuss with your therapist.
• The role of the trainers is to teach and help you with skills, not to act as
your therapists.
• All sessions are confidential so that every participant can feel
comfortable and safe. Do not reveal the names or any other identifying
information of other participants. Any discussions with outsiders about
the course should be strictly limited to your own experience and the
skills you are learning. However, you may speak openly and freely with
your individual therapist, because what you discuss with him or her is

confidential.
• Contact among participants outside sessions is discouraged, as you
should not have to feel responsible for the needs or crises of other
participants. At times, outside contact can create conflicts among group
members that affect the sessions. As per your agreement to keep
confidentiality, do not discuss others in the group or their problems with
any participant (or anyone else). If you do have contact with other
participants outside of session, we ask that you not to talk about others
or their problems.
• Active participation in each session is expected because it will help you
learn more effectively, even when you feel intense. Participation also
helps you stay more present and focused.
• Time-outs of up to 10 minutes may be taken during a session should
you have need to compose and ground yourself. You are requested to
inform the trainers that you are taking a break, rather than just leaving
without saying anything. You are also requested to return to the session
on your own accord within 10 minutes. If at all possible, try to stay in
the session, where it might be easier for you to get yourself grounded
and calmer. If you cannot, then take the break. If you feel you cannot
return to group after 10 minutes, inform a trainer that you are going
home and are safe. If you cannot control your behavior or manage your
feelings such that you can participate in group, it is likely that the course
is too overwhelming for you. In addition, uncontained behaviors such as
unrelenting crying, screaming, switching to disruptive parts of yourself,
or hurting yourself are upsetting to other participants. Therefore, if you
are unable to control your behaviors, you will be asked to withdraw from
the course until you are better able to remain present and in control.
• Trainers or other participants will not follow you if you take a time-
out; they will continue on with the session. There are no exceptions to
this policy. You are expected to be responsible for yourself during
sessions, as well as for arriving and leaving safely and in a timely
manner.
• Never leave a session abruptly without saying anything. If you decide
during a session, or while you are taking a break that you are unable to
continue with the session, always inform the trainers, assuring them that
you can get home safely.
• Physical or verbal intimidation or abuse is not acceptable. Any such
behavior will lead to your immediate termination from the course. You
are expected to be able to remain in an adult state and be respectful of
yourself and others. If you feel angry or frustrated during a session,

please remain in your seat. Do not raise your voice, scream, or curse. Do
not make threatening physical movements or gestures toward others, or
throw objects of any kind.
• Weapons or instruments of self-harm of any kind are not allowed in
sessions, even if they are kept in a covered or sealed bag. Each
participant, including you, deserves and needs to feel safe.
• The use of alcohol and drugs is prohibited during sessions. If you
come to a session under the influence of alcohol or drugs, you will be
immediately terminated from the group. You may then sign up for the
next course if you are able to abstain from using.
• If you require psychiatric hospitalization or have any other prolonged
absence during the training course that lasts longer than 3 weeks (three
course sessions), you must drop out. However, you may sign up for the
next available course if you are stable enough. In case of a
hospitalization that is less than 3 weeks, a meeting with your trainers,
your therapist, and you will determine whether you are able to continue
in the course. It is important that you learn to find the pace of learning
and challenges that are right for you. If you miss five sessions during the
course, you will need to drop out, and can repeat the group next time.
• If you have questions about the course, ask them during sessions.
Other participants often have the same or similar questions, so your
questions are welcomed in the sessions and are usually helpful to others.
However, there may be times when the trainers may postpone a
particular question until a later time, depending on how it fits with the
current topic.
• Please refrain from discussing any problems or matters that are not
related to what you are learning in the course. These should be
discussed with your personal therapist, not in the sessions.
• If one of the trainers is also your personal therapist, he or she will be
as discreet as possible with regard to your personal information from
your individual sessions. It is wise to discuss ahead of time with your
therapist what should and should not be shared in the training course.
• You must sign a release of information if your personal therapist is not
one of the trainers, so that the trainer and your therapist can
communicate and coordinate for your benefit. You cannot attend the
course unless you are willing to sign a release, as treatment coordination
is essential for your well-being.
• An educational meeting will be held for people who are important to

you, for example, a partner, close friend, or family member. During the
meeting general facts about dissociation and complex dissociative
disorders and about the skills-training topics will be discussed. No
personal information about you or other participants will be disclosed or
discussed by the trainers, your significant others, or you. You may
submit a list of questions or issues you would like for your support
person(s) to know more about. We ask that you bring at least one person
to this meeting with you, but we realize that you may not have such a
support person, so it is not mandatory. Regardless of whether you bring
someone, we strongly encourage you to attend.

APPENDIX C
Participant Contract for a Skills-Training
Group
1.
I understand that it is important to attend every session, both for my own
sake and for the success of the training course. Therefore, I hereby
commit to attending every session unless I am prevented by
circumstances beyond my control. If I cannot attend, I will inform the
trainers as soon as possible, with the understanding that it is a courtesy
for the trainers and participants to know who will be absent.
2.
I understand that I will be obliged to leave the course if I miss more than
three consecutive sessions or a total of five sessions over the course of the
group, including for reasons of prolonged hospitalization or illness. I
understand I will be allowed to sign up for the next course, if I am ready.
3.
I agree to complete my homework assignments and bring them to
sessions, and to practice the skills to the best of my ability.
4.
I agree to participate verbally in sessions to the best of my ability.
5.
I will respect the confidentiality of all course participants and of matters
that come up in the course. I will not discuss personal information about
fellow members outside the course.
6.
I agree to abstain from alcohol or drugs (other than those prescribed,
which I will take according to the prescribed dose and time) for at least
24 hours prior to and following sessions.
Printed Name { . . . }
Address { . . . }
{ . . . }
Phone
Day { . . . }
Evening { . . . }

Cell { . . . }
Best number to reach me is: { . . . } day { . . . } evening { . . . } cell phone
E-mail: { . . . }
Signature { . . . } Date { . . . }
Name of individual therapist { . . . }
Phone number of individual therapist { . . . }
E-mail of individual therapist (if available) { . . . }

APPENDIX D
Skills-Training Group Final Evaluation
1. What was your experience of participating in the course?
2. What was the most important thing you, or parts of you, learned in this
course?
3. Describe ways in which the group felt safe or unsafe to you, or parts of
you.
4. What goals did you set for yourself during the course? Did you meet
(some) of them?
5. What, if any, positive changes have you noticed in yourself or other parts
of you?
6. What, if any, negative changes have you noticed in yourself or other parts
of you?
7. Did you find it difficult to participate in group at times? If so, what was
difficult for you? Was there something that the group trainers or participants
might have done differently to help you?
8. On average, were you able to use the topics and homework exercises to
benefit yourself? If so, give an example. If not, please elaborate.
9. List any imagery or relaxation exercises you found particularly helpful in
the manual, and note what was helpful about them.

10. Which parts of this course have helped you most? Order them from the
most helpful to the least helpful by ranking them 4 (most helpful) to 1 (least
helpful).
{ . . . } Homework
{ . . . } New topics and facts
{ . . . } Exercises
{ . . . } Sharing with other participants
Comments:
11. Which topics were most helpful to you? Least helpful?
12. During the course a lot of attention was paid to improving inner empathy,
communication, and cooperation among parts of yourself. What in the course
was most helpful for you in this regard? Least helpful? Were you able to
improve your inner empathy, communication, and cooperation? If so, please
describe. If not, do you have some ideas about what might have been more
helpful?
13. What do you think of your own participation during the course? (for
example, satisfied for the most part, did better than I expected, was harder
than I thought)
14. What was your experience of the contributions of other group members
(for example, helpful, boring, hard to follow, too long, not enough
participation). Please elaborate, if you are able.
15. On average, how would you rate the helpfulness of the homework?
Excellent
Good
Fair
Poor
Inconsistent
Comments:
16. On average, how would you rate the difficulty of the homework?
Beyond my abilities
Difficult but manageable most of the time
Just about right

Easy
Too simplistic
Comments:
17. How would you rate the expertise and professionalism of the trainers?
Name of trainer { . . . }
Excellent
Good
Fair
Poor
Inconsistent
Comments:
Name of trainer { . . . }
Excellent
Good
Fair
Poor
Inconsistent
Comments
18. How would you rate the helpfulness of the trainers?
Name of trainer { . . . }
Excellent
Good
Fair
Poor
Inconsistent
Comments:
Name of trainer { . . . }
Excellent
Good
Fair
Poor
Inconsistent
Comments
19. Suggestions for the manual or future courses.

REFERENCES
Adams, J. (2005). Boundary issues: Using boundary intelligence to get the
intimacy you want and the independence you need in life, love, and work.
New York: Wiley.
Allen, J. G., Fonagy, P., & Bateman, A. W. (2008). Mentalizing in clinical
practice. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
Artigas, L., & Jarero, I. (2005). El abrazo de la mariposa [The butterfly’s
embrace]. Revista de Psicotrauma para Iberoamérica, 4(1), 30–31.
Bandler, R., & Grinder, J. (1975).The structure of magic. Palo Alto, CA: Science
and Behavior Books.
Beck, A. T. (1975). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. Madison, CT:
International Universities Press.
Bernstein, E., & Putnam, F. (1986). Development, reliability, and validity of a
dissociation scale. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 174, 727–735.
Blum, N., St. John, D., Pfohl, B., Stuart, S., McCormick, B., Allen, J., et al.
(2008). Systems Training for Emotional Predictability and Problem Solving
(STEPPS) for outpatients with borderline personality disorder: A
randomized controlled trial and 1-year follow-up. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 165, 468–478.
Boon, S. (1997). The treatment of traumatic memories in DID: Indications and
contraindications. Dissociation, 10, 65–79.
Boon, S. (2003). Directieve en hypnotheraputische interrenties als onderdeel van
een fasengerichte behandeling voor vroeger seksueel misbruik. In N. Nicolaï
(red.), Handbook Psychotherapie na seksueel misbruik (pp. 209–224).
Utrecht: De Tijdstroom.
Boon, S., & Draijer, N. (1993). Multiple personality disorder in the Netherlands.
Amsterdam: Swets & Zeitlinger.
Boon, S., & Draijer, N. (1995). Screening and diagnostiek van dissociatieve
stoornissen [Screening and diagnostics of dissociative disorders]. Lisse, The
Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger.
Boon, S., Draijer, N., & Matthess, H. (2006). Interview voor dissociatieve
stoornissen en traumagerelateerde symptomen (IDSTS). Eerste versie,
uitgave in eigen beheer. [Interview for Dissociative Disorders and Trauma-
related Symptoms (IDDTS)]. Unpublished manuscript. (Available from
Suzette Boon, PhD, at s.boon@altrecht.nl; or Suzette Boon, PhD, Brinkveld
TRTC, Oude Arnhemse Weg 260, 3705BK, Zeist, The Netherlands.)
Boon, S., & Van der Hart, O. (1991). De behandeling van de multiple
persoonlijkheidsstoornis. In O. van der Hart (red.), Trauma, Dissociatie &
Hypnose (pp. 159–187). Lisse: Swets & Zeitlinger.

Bos, E. H., Van Wel, E. B., Appelo, M. T., & Verbraak, M. J. (2010). A
randomized controlled trial of a Dutch version of systems training for
emotional predictability and problem solving for borderline personality
disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 198, 299–304.
Bowlby, J. (1973) Attachment and loss: Volume 2. Separation: Anxiety and
anger. New York: Basic Books.
Brand, B. L., Classen, C. C., Lanius, R., Loewenstein, R. J., McNary, S. W., Pain,
C., et al. (2009). A naturalistic study of Dissociative Identity Disorder and
Dissociative Disorder Not Otherwise Specified patient treatment by
community clinicians. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice,
and Policy, 1, 153–171.
Brand, B. L., Classen, C. C., McNary, S. W., & Zaveri, P. (2009). A review of
dissociative disorders treatment studies. Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease, 197, 646–654.
Braun, B. G. (Ed.). (1986). Treatment of multiple personality disorder.
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Brown, D., Scheflin, A. W., & Hammond, D. C. (1998). Memory, trauma
treatment, and the law. New York: Norton.
Burns, D. D. (1999). Feeling good: The new mood therapy (rev. ed.). New York:
Harper.
Carnes, P. (1997). Sexual anorexia: Overcoming sexual self-hatred. Center City,
MN: Hazelden Publishing.
Chu, J. A. (1998). Rebuilding shattered lives: The responsible treatment of
complex post-traumatic and dissociative disorders. New York: Wiley.
Cloitre, M., Cohen, L. R., & Koenen, K. C. (2006). Treating survivors of
childhood abuse: Psychotherapy for the interrupted life. New York:
Guilford Press.
Coons, P. M., & Milstein, V. (1990). Self-mutilation associated with dissociative
disorders. Dissociation , 3(2), 81–87.
Courtois, C. A. (1999). Recollections of sexual abuse: Treatment principles and
guidelines. New York: Norton.
Dell, P. F. (2002). Dissociative phenomenology of dissociative identity disorder.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 190, 10–15.
Dell, P. F. (2006). A new model of Dissociative Identity Disorder. Psychiatric
Clinics of North America, 29(1), 1–26.
Dorrepaal, E., Thomaes K., & Draijer, N. (2006). Stabilisatiecursus als antwoord
op complexe posttraumatische stress-stoornis [Stabilization course as an
answer to complex post-traumatic stress disorder. Diagnosis, treatment and
research in women abused in childhood with a complex post-traumatic stress
disorder]. Tijdschrift voorPsychiatrie, 48, 217–222.
Dorrepaal, E., Thomaes, K., & Draijer, N. (2008). Vroeger en verder: Cursus na
een geschiedenis van misbruik of mishandeling [Earlier and further:
Stabilization course as an answer to complex PTSD]. Amsterdam: Pearson
Assessment.
Eysenck, M. W. (1992). Anxiety: The cognitive perspective. Hove, England:
Erlbaum.
Fine, C. G. (1988). Thoughts on the cognitive perceptual substrates of multiple
personality disorder. Dissociation, 1(4), 5–10.
Fine, C. G. (1996). A cognitively based treatment model for DSM-IV dissociative

identity disorder. In L. Michelson & W. J. Ray (Eds.), Handbook of
dissociation: Theoretical, empirical, and clinical perspectives (pp. 401–
411). New York: Plenum Press.
Fine, C. G., & Comstock, C. (1989). Completion of cognitive schemata and
affective realms through temporary blending of personalities. In B. G. Braun
(Ed.), Dissociative Disorders 1989--Proceedings of the 6th International
Conference on Multiple Personality/Dissociative States (p. 17). Chicago:
Rush University.
Fonagy, P., Gergely, G., Jurist, E., & Target, M. (2002). Affect regulation,
mentalization, and the development of the self. New York: Other Press.
Fonagy, P., & Target, M. (1997). Attachment and reflective function: Their role
in self- organization. Development and Psychopathology, 9, 679–700.
Follette, V. M., & Pistorello, J. (2007). Finding life beyond trauma: Using
acceptance and commitment therapy to heal from posttraumatic stress and
trauma-related problems. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications.
Ford, J .D., & Russo, E. (2006). Trauma-focused, present-centered, emotional
self-regulation approach to integrated treatment for posttraumatic stress and
addiction: Trauma Adaptive Recovery Group Education and Therapy
(TARGET). American Journal of Psychotherapy, 60, 335–355.
Fraser, G. (1991). The dissociation table technique: A strategy for working with
ego states in dissociative disorders and ego-state therapy. Dissociation, 4,
205–213.
Fraser, G. (2003). Fraser’s Dissociative Table Technique revisited, revised: A
strategy for working with ego states in dissociative disorders and ego-state
therapy. Journal of Trauma and Dissociation, 4(4), 5–28.
Goodwin, J. M., & Attias, R. (1993). Eating disorders in survivors of multimodal
childhood abuse. In R. P. Kluft & C. G. Fine (Eds.), Clinical perspectives on
multiple personality disorder (pp. 327–341). Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Press.
Graber, K. (1991). Ghosts in the bedroom: A guide for partners of incest
survivors. Dearfield Beach, FL: Health Communications.
Gratz, K., & Walsh, B. (2009). Freedom from selfharm: Overcoming self-injury
with DBT and other skills. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications.
Harris, M. (1998). Trauma recovery and empowerment: A clinician’s guide for
working with women in groups. New York: Free Press.
Hayes, S. C., Folette, V. M., & Linehan, M. M. (Eds.). (2004). Mindfulness and
acceptance: Expanding the cognitive-behavioral tradition. New York:
Guilford.
Hayes, S. C., Wilson, K. G., Gifford, E. V., & Follette, V. M. (1996). Experiential
avoidance and behavioral disorders: A functional dimensional approach to
diagnosis and treatment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64,
1152–1168.
Herman, J. L. (1992). Trauma and recovery. New York: Basic Books.
Horevitz, R., & Loewenstein, R. J. (1994). The rational treatment of multiple
personality. In S. J. Lynn & J. W. Rhue (Eds.), Dissociation: Clinical and
theoretical perspectives (pp. 289–316). New York: Guilford Press.
International Society for the Study of Trauma and Dissociation (ISSTD). (in
press). Guidelines for treating dissociative identity disorder in adults, 3rd
revision. Journal of Trauma and Dissociation, 12.

Jacobson, E. (1974). Progressive relaxation: A physiological and clinical
investigation of muscular states and their significance in psychology and
medical practice (3rd ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Janoff-Bulman, R. (1992). Shattered assumptions: Towards a new psychology of
trauma. New York: Free Press.
Kashdana, T. B., Barrios, V., Forsyth, J. P., & Steger, M. F. (2006). Experiential
avoidance as a generalized psychological vulnerability: Comparisons with
coping and emotion regulation strategies. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
44, 1301–1320.
Kluft, R. P. (Ed.). (1985). Childhood antecedents of multiple personality.
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Kluft, R. P. (1987). First-rank symptoms as a diagnostic clue to multiple
personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 144, 293–298.
Kluft, R. P. (1993). Clinical approaches to the integration of personalities. In R. P.
Kluft & C. G. Fine (Eds.), Clinical perspectives on multiple personality
disorder (pp. 101–133). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Kluft, R. P. (1999). An overview of the psychotherapy of dissociative identity
disorder. American Journal of Psychotherapy, 53, 289–319.
Kluft, R. P. (2006). Dealing with alters: A pragmatic clinical perspective.
Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 29, 281–304.
Kluft, R. P. (2007). Applications of innate affect theory to the understanding and
treatment of dissociative identity disorder. In E. Vermetten, M. J. Dorahy, &
D. Spiegel (Eds.), Traumatic dissociation: Neurobiology and treatment (pp.
301–316). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Kluft, R. P., & Fine, C. G. (Eds.). (1993). Clinical perspectives on multiple
personality disorder. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Krakauer, S. Y. (2001). Treating dissociative identity disorder: The power of the
collective heart. Philadephia: Brunner-Routledge.
Lanius, R. A., Vermetten, E., Loewenstein, R. J., Brand, B., Schmahl, C.,
Bremner, J. D., et al. (2010). Emotion modulation in PTSD: Clinical and
neurobiological evidence for a dissociative subtype. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 167, 640–647.
Lehrer, J. (2009). How we decide. New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Linden, A. (2008). Boundaries in human relationships: How to be separate and
connected. Williston, VT: Crown House Publishing.
Linehan, M. M. (1993). Skills training manual for treating borderline personality
disorder. New York: Guilford Press.
Loewenstein, G. F., Weber, E. U., Hsee, C. K., & Welch, N. (2001). Risk as
feelings. Psychological Bulletin, 127, 267–286.
Loewenstein, R. J. (1991). An office mental status examination for complex
chronic dissociative symptoms and multiple personality disorder. Psychiatric
Clinics of North America, 14, 567–604.
Lynd, H. (1958). On shame and the search for identity. New York: Harcourt.
Maltz, W. (2001). The sexual healing journey: A guide for survivors of sexual
abuse (2nd ed.). New York: Harper Collins Publishers.
Mann, L., & Tan, C. (1993). The hassled decision maker: The effects of perceived
time pressure on information processing in decision making. Australian
Journal of Management, 18, 197–209.
McCullough, L., Kuhn, N., Andrews, S., Kaplan, A., Wolf, J., Hurley, C. L., et al.

(2003). Treating affect phobia: A manual for short-term dynamic
psychotherapy. New York: Guilford Press.
McLean, P. D., (1985). Brain evolution relating to family, play, and the separation
call. Archives of General Psychiatry, 42, 405–417.
Michelson, L., & Ray, W. J. (Eds.). (1996). Handbook of dissociation:
Theoretical, empirical, and clinical perspectives. New York: Plenum Press.
Miller, D. (1994). Women who hurt themselves: A book of hope and
understanding. New York: Basic Books.
Najavits, (2002). Seeking safety: A treatment manual for PTSD and substance
abuse. New York: Guilford Press.
Nathanson, D. L. (1992). Shame and pride: Affect, sex, and the birth of the self.
New York: Norton.
Nijenhuis, E. R. S., Spinhoven, P., Van Dyck, R., Van der Hart, O., &
Vanderlinden, J. (1996). The development and psychometric characteristics
of the Somatoform Dissociation Questionnaire (SDQ-20). Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 184, 688–694.
Ogden, P., Minton K., & Pain C. (2006). Trauma and the body: A sensorimotor
approach to psychotherapy. New York: Norton.
O’Shea, K. (2009). EMDR friendly preparation methods for adults and children.
In R. Shapiro (Ed.), EMDR solutions II: For depression, eating disorders,
performance, and more (pp. 289–312). New York: Norton.
Panksepp, J. (1998). Affective neuroscience: The foundations of human and
animal emotions. New York: Oxford University Press.
Paterson, R. J. (2000). The assertiveness workbook: How to express your ideas
and stand up for yourself at work and in relationships. Oakland, CA: New
Harbinger Publications.
Pelcovitz, D., Van der Kolk, B. A., Roth, S., Mandel, F., Kaplan, S., & Resick, P.
(1997). Development of a criteria set and a structured interview for the
disorders of extreme stress (SIDES). Journal of Traumatic Stress, 10, 3–16.
Phelps, S., & Austin, A. (2002). The assertive woman. San Luis Obispo, CA:
Impact Publications.
Putnam, F. W. (1989). Diagnosis and treatment of multiple personality disorder.
New York: Guilford.
Putnam, F. W. (1997). Dissociation in children and adolescents: A developmental
perspective. New York: Guilford Press.
Ross, C. A. (1989). Multiple personality disorder: Diagnosis, clinical features,
and treatment. Toronto, Canada: Wiley.
Ross, C. A. (1997). Dissociative identity disorder: Diagnosis, clinical features,
and treatment. New York: Wiley.
Ross, C. A., Heber, S., Norton, G. R., Anderson, B., Anderson, G., & Barchet, P.
(1989). The Dissociative Disorders Interview Schedule: A structured
interview. Dissociation, 2, 169–189.
Rothbaum, B., Foa, E., & Hembree, E. (2007). Reclaiming your life from a
traumatic experience: A prolonged exposure treatment program workbook.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Schmidt, S. J. (2009). The Developmental Needs Meeting Strategy: An ego state
therapy for healing adults with childhood trauma and attachment wounds.
San Antonio, TX: DNMS Institute.
Schore, A. (2001). The effects of a secure attachment relationship on right brain

development, affect regulation, and infant mental health. Infant Mental
Health Journal, 22, 7–66.
Siegel, D. J. (1999). The developing mind: Toward a neurobiology of
interpersonal experience. New York: Guilford Press.
Slade, A. (1999). Attachment theory and research: Implications for the theory and
practice of individual psychotherapy with adults. In J. Cassidy & P. R.
Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory, research and clinical
applications (pp. 575–594). New York: Guilford
Steele, K., Dorahy, M., Van der Hart, O., & Nijenhuis, E. R. S. (2009).
Dissociation versus alterations in consciousness: Related but different
concepts. In P. F. Dell & J. A. O’Neil (Eds.), Dissociation and the
dissociative disorders: DSM-V and beyond (pp. 155–170). New York:
Routledge.
Steele, K., & Van der Hart, O. (2009). Treating dissociation. In C. A. Courtois &
J. D. Ford (Eds.), Treating complex traumatic stress disorders (pp. 145–
165). New York: Guilford Press.
Steele, K., Van der Hart, O., & Nijenhuis, E. R. S. (2001). Dependency in the
treatment of complex posttraumatic stress disorder and dissociative
disorders. Journal of Trauma and Dissociation, 2(4), 79–116.
Steele, K., Van der Hart, O., & Nijenhuis, E. R. S. (2005). Phase-oriented
treatment of structural dissociation in complex traumatization: Overcoming
trauma-related phobias. Journal of Trauma and Dissociation, 6(3), 11–53.
Steinberg, M. (1994). Structured clinical interview for DSM-IV dissociative
disorders, revised. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Steinberg, M. (1995). Handbook for the assessment of dissociation: A clinical
guide. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Tomkins, S. S. (1963). Affect/imagery/consciousness: Vol. 2. The negative affects.
New York: Springer.
Tracy, J. L., Robins, R. W., & Tangney, J. P. (Eds.). (2007). The self-conscious
emotions: Theory and research. New York: Guilford Press.
Van Derbur, M. (2004). Miss America by day: Lessons learned from ultimate
betrayals and unconditional love. Denver, CO: Oak Hill Ridge Press.
Van der Hart, O. (2009, November). Haunted and harassed: Perception, memory,
and decision-making in the dissociative patient: The 2009 Pierre Janet
Memorial Lecture. Paper presented at the International Society for the Study
of Trauma and Dissociation 26th Annual Conference, Washington, DC.
Van der Hart, O., & Boon, S. (1997). Treatment strategies for complex
dissociative disorders: Two Dutch case examples. Dissociation, 10, 157–
165.
Van der Hart, O., Boon, S., Friedman, B., & Mierop, V. (1992). De reactivering
van traumatische herinneringen. Dth, 12(1), 12–55.
Van der Hart, O., Steele, K., Boon, S., & Brown, P. (1993). The treatment of
traumatic memories: Synthesis, realization, and integration. Dissociation,
6(2/3), 162–180.
Van der Hart, O., Nijenhuis, E. R. S., & Solomon, R. (2010). Dissociation of the
personality in complex trauma-related disorders and EMDR: Theoretical
considerations. Journal of EMDR Practice and Research, 4, 76–92.
Van der Hart, O., Nijenhuis, E. R. S., & Steele, K. (2005). Dissociation: An
under-recognized feature of complex PTSD. Journal of Traumatic Stress,

18, 413–424.
Van der Hart, O., Nijenhuis, E. R. S., & Steele, K. (2006). The haunted self:
Structural dissociation and the treatment of chronic traumatization. New
York/London: Norton.
Van der Hart, O., & Steele, K. (1997). Time distortions in dissociative identity
disorder: Janetian concepts and treatment. Dissociation, 10, 91–103.
Van der Hart, O., Van der Kolk, B. A., & Boon, S. (1998). Treatment of
dissociative disorders. In J. D. Bremner & C. R. Marmar (Eds.), Trauma,
memory, and dissociation (pp. 253–283). Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Press.
Van der Kolk, B. A. (1996). The complexity of adaptation to trauma: Self-
regulation, stimulus discrimination, and characterological development. In
B. A. van der Kolk, A. C. McFarlane, & L. Weiseath (Eds.), Traumatic
stress: The effects of overwhelming experience on mind, body, and society
(pp. 182–213). New York: Guilford Press.
Vanderlinden, J., & Vandereycken, W. (1997). Trauma, dissociation, and impulse
control in eating disorders. Bristol, PA: Brunner/Mazel.
Vermilyea, E. G. (2007). Growing beyond survival: A self-help toolkit for
managing traumatic stress. Baltimore, MD: Sidran Press.
Waller, N. G., Putnam, F. W., & Carlson, E. B. (1996). Types of dissociation and
dissociative types: A taxonomic analysis of dissociative experiences.
Psychological Methods, 1, 300–321.
Westen, D., Novotny, C. M., & Thompson-Brenner, H. (2004) The empirical
status of empirically supported psychotherapies: Assumptions, findings and
reporting in controlled clinical trials. Psychological Bulletin,130, 631–663.
Williams, M. B., & Poijula, S. (2002). The PTSD workbook: Simple, effective
techniques for overcoming posttraumatic stress symptoms. Oakland, CA:
New Harbinger Publications.
Wolfsdorf, B. A., & Zlotnick, C. (2001). Affect management in group therapy for
women with posttraumatic stress disorder and histories of childhood sexual
abuse. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 57, 169–181.
World Health Organization. (1992). The ICD-10 classification of mental and
behavioural disorders. Geneva: Author.
Wright, P. (1974). The harassed decision maker: Time pressures, distractions, and
the use of evidence. Journal of Applied Psychology, 59, 555–561.
Zlotnick, C., Shea, T. M., Rosen, K., Simpson, E., Mulrenin, K., Begin, A., et al.
(1997). An affect-management group for survivors of sexual abuse with
PTSD. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 10, 425–436.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many of our colleagues have made significant contributions to this
manual, both through other training groups they have developed,
and in offering ideas and suggestions. We especially mention Nel
Draijer, Ethy Dorrepaal, and Kathleen Thomaes, who inspired us
with their Stabilization Course, Vroeger and Verder, to develop this
skills training. The teams and colleagues in the Netherlands who
work with one of the authors (S.B.) have been invaluable in making
contributions to the treatment of complex dissociative disorders and
developing skills-training techniques. We would like to give special
thanks to Sheri Miller, LCSW, and Kate O’Mullan, BA, for their
helpful contributions to chapter 30, Coping with Isolation and
Loneliness. We would like to thank Jolanda Treffers for her
excellent preface for patients from the perspective of a survivor.
She originally wrote this for our Dutch translation. We are glad that
her text now will be included in all future translations and reprints.
Most of all, we would like to thank our patients, who had the
courage to share themselves with us, who have worked tirelessly
for healing, and who are our most important inspiration for the
manual. Many participants of the courses run in The Netherlands in
the past 6 years, as well as several in the United States, provided
invaluable comments on earlier versions of the manual, thus
helping us improve it. We are very grateful for your suggestions
and comments.
This manual contains many techniques. It is impossible to trace
the origin of some long-standing techniques, because they have
often come from an oral history of psychotherapy traditions, and
some are ubiquitous. We have done our best to credit those
techniques, and we apologize if we have unintentionally failed to
cite sources.

INDEX
Page numbers listed correspond to the print edition of this book. You can use your
device’s search function to locate particular terms in the text.
abandonment, 169, 366
absences, skills-training group and, 430, 447
abuse, 139, 266, 366
see also child abuse; sexual abuse; trauma
acceptance
of dissociation, 76
of parts of self, gradual acknowledgment and, 73
acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT), xii
activity, balanced distribution of, 112
adaptive decisions, 324
adaptive guilt, pervasive guilt vs., 293
addictions, xi, 141. see also substance abuse
affect, in complex PTSD and alterations in regulation of, 44
affect phobia, xi
aggression, as nonassertive strategy, 380, 381. see also anger
alcohol
sleep problems and, 100
traumatized people and self-medication with, 141–42
alienation from self, dissociative disorder and symptoms of, 16–17
alienation from surroundings, dissociative disorder and symptoms of, 17–18
all-or-nothing thinking, 237
alone time
loneliness vs., 367–68
pleasant experiences during, 370
altered physical sensations, dissociation and, 139–40
amnesia, 15–16, 248, 282, 315
anchors, 19–20, 47, 101, 104, 105, 180–81
anger
agenda on coping with, 263
common inaccurate beliefs about, 264–65
complex dissociative disorder and, 266–68
coping with, 263–76
dissociative parts and avoidance of, 30, 267–68, 271, 273–76, 334, 361–62
dissociative parts fixated in, 267–68
expressions of, 265
in people with complex dissociative disorder, 266–68

personality parts imitating people who hurt you and, 30
physical signs of, 269
resolving, challenging core beliefs and using reflection for, 272
as substitute for other emotions, 265
time outs from, 270, 272
tips for coping with, 269–71
understanding your experience of, homework, 273–74
angry dissociative parts of self
calming and containing in relational conflicts, 361–62
understanding and coping with, homework, 275–76
understanding and coping with, skills review, 334
anniversary dates, difficult feelings and triggers related to, 190, 191
“anniversary reactions,” 169
antidepressants, 142
anxiety, xi
chronic, 278
eating problems and, 150
fear vs., 279
healthy, 279–80
holidays and, 190
perception, judgment and effects of, 328
posttraumatic stress disorder and, 35, 36
self-medicating with substances and, 141
time pressure and, 327
appeasement, 380, 381, 382
appointments
current daily structure and, 119–20
realistic and healthy daily structure and, 121–22
arousal and window of tolerance, 214–17
auto- and relational regulation, 215–16
avoidance of emotion, 216–17
lack of reflection and, 216
ashamed parts of personality, 31
assertiveness
basic skills for, 378–80
benefits of, 378
complex dissociative disorder and problems with, 383–84
defined, 378
example of, 382
identifying inner conflicts and in the way of, 387–88, 408
identifying inner conflicts preventing, skills review, 408
inner cooperation and, 384–86
learning about, 377–91
personal boundary setting and, 393
preparing for, in upcoming situation, 390–91, 408
preparing for, in upcoming situation, skills review, 408
using skills: retrospective look at skills, 389
attachment. see abandonment; phobia of attachment; phobia of attachment loss;
relationships

attention, complex PTSD and changes in, 40, 44
attention-deficit disorders, 189
attention problems, identifying, homework, 40
autobiographical memory, traumatic memory and, 166
automatic thoughts, 229, 247
auto-regulation, 215–16, 346, 406
avoidance, 35, 36, 40, 53, 216–17, 290, 292–93, 380, 381, 429
avoidant parts, support for, in dealing with relational conflict, 360–61
awareness, 18–19, 76
Axis I comorbidity, in patients with dissociative disorders, 417
Axis II comorbidity, in patients with dissociative disorders, 417–18
balance in daily structure, finding, 113
bedtime routine, 110, 158
bedwetting, 98, 99
behaviors, feedback loops of, 205–6
being in the present, 84
beliefs, realistic, developing, 252–53
betrayal, 366
bingeing, 151, 154
bipolar disorders, dissociative disorders vs., 415
birthdays, 191
blending of parts, 307–9, 337, 386, 391, 399
body awareness, 138–41
body language, assertiveness, 379
body perceptions, 138–39
borderline personality disorders, xiii
dialectical behavior therapy for, xi
dissociative disorders vs., 415
boundaries, 345, 393–98, 399, 403–4, 410
breathing, 6
breathing exercises, 104
calming and soothing yourself, 219–20, 255
calmness, 84, 181–82
care of self. see physical self-care
CBT. see cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT)
child abuse, 9, 138
childhood traumatization, 8
child parts
blending and, 308–9
experience of, 302–3
phobic avoidance of, 303
working with, 305–7
chores
communicating about, 115
current daily structure and, 119–20
realistic and healthy daily structure and, 121–22
chronic dissociation, origins of, 9

chronic lateness, 429
chronic reactions to an emotion, 61
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), xii
cognitive errors, 236–40, 242–44, 246, 258
see also core beliefs
collapsed boundaries, 395–96
collapse mode
dissociative parts of self and, 347
fear and, 279
relationships, dissociative parts of self and, 347
shame and, 288
communication
forms of, 72–74
inner meetings, 75
with parts of yourself, 73–74
talking inwardly, 75
written forms of, 74–75
complex dissociative disorder
anger and, 266–68
assertiveness problems and, 383–84
avoidance of emotion and, 216–17
blending and, 308–9
boundary problems and, 396–98
decision-making problems and, 326
diagnostic assessment for, 415
eating problems and, 151–52
executive functioning problems and, 189
exploring thoughts and, 248–49
fear and, 277, 278, 280–82
inner chaos, confusion, and, 188
negative core beliefs and, 229–31
planning issues for people with a, 188–89
priority setting and, 189
problems with daily structure and, 112–13
problems with emotions and, 206–8
problems with free time and relaxation and, 124–25
problems with reflection and, 59–61
resolving relational conflicts and, 358–62
sleep problems and, 98
time management difficulties and, 189
complex posttraumatic stress disorder (CPTSD), xii, 35, 38, 43, 44, 45, 444–45
concentration difficulties, 19, 40
confidentiality issues, 417, 446
conflicted emotions, 84–85
conflict management skills, 363–64, 407
relational conflicts and, homework, 363–64
using, skills review, 407
conflicts in relationships, 356–64
conscious avoidance, 53

conscious decisions, 330
consciousness, 44
contact between sessions, 431, 446
containment, 219, 255
control, fearing loss of, 71
cooking, 113, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155
cooperation, inner, 181–82
core beliefs
agenda on challenging of, 245
agenda on understanding of, 227
assertiveness and challenging of, 385
automatic thoughts and, 247
challenging, reflections for understanding, 248–49, 250–51, 258, 272
challenging, skills review, 258
challenging, to resolve anger, 272
healthy boundary setting and, 398
identifying negative, homework, 232–33
inaccurate, challenging, homework, 250–51
maintenance of isolation and, 366
negative, 229–31
origins of, 228–29
realistic and healthy, 231, 234–35, 257
understanding, 228
see also cognitive errors
counter-phobic dissociative parts, 282
countertransference issues, 417
course participants
assessment and diagnosis of, 415–21
choosing course participants, 416–18
diagnostic assessment for complex dissociative disorders, 415
inclusion criteria for, 416
intake session, 419
optimal group composition, 420–21
course participation
dropping out, 418
repeating course and, 418
timing of, 418
cutting behaviors, 316
daily structure, 112–13, 119–20, 159
day-treatment, 433
DBT. see dialectical behavior therapy (DBT)
DDNOS. see dissociative disorder not otherwise specified (DDNOS)
“death feigning,” in animals, 37
decision making
complex dissociative disorder and problems with, 326
conscious, 330
creating inner meeting space for, 330–31
of daily living, 324

examining pros and cons in, 329–30
improving, 323–39
rating system for, 330
time pressure and, 327–28
understanding, 324–25
deep breathing, 220
defense reaction, triggers and, 167
defensive fight mode, 267
dental appointments, 144, 191
depersonalization, 16–17
depression, xi
eating problems and, 150
holidays and, 190
posttraumatic stress disorder and, 35
self-medicating with substances and, 141
derealization, 17–18
DES. see Dissociative Experiences Scale (DES)
DES-Taxon (DES-T), 415
detachment, 35
Developmental Needs Meeting Strategy, 306
diagnosis, of dissociative disorders, 9–11
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)
dissociative disorder not otherwise specified, subtype 1b criteria, 443
dissociative disorders classifications and, 10
dissociative identity disorder diagnostic criteria, 443
posttraumatic stress disorder criteria, 443–44
diagnostic assessment, of complex dissociative disorders, 415
dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), xi, 419
diary, tracking time in, 115
DID. see dissociative identity disorder (DID)
difficult times
agenda on planning for, 187
holidays and other special times, 190–92
how to plan for, 188–89, 192–94
preparing for, homework, 196–98
reflections to help with planning for, 193
strategic skills review for, 200
when obligations to others conflict with your needs, 194–95
disgust
body perceived as object of, 138–39
phobia of inner experience and, 52
disorders of extreme stress not otherwise specified (DESNOS), criteria for, 444–
45
disruptions, minimizing during group sessions, 429
dissociation
agenda for session on, 3
alienation or estrangement from self or body and, 16–17
alienation or estrangement from your surroundings and, 17–18
altered physical sensations and, 139–40

chronic, origins of, 9
defined, 8
depersonalization and, 16–17
derealization and, 17–18
dissociative amnesia and, 15–16
experiencing too little: apparent loss of functions with, 15
experiencing too much: intrusions and, 18
other changes in awareness with, 18–19
problems with identity or sense of self and, 14–15
reflecting on what you learned about, 12
reflective functioning impeded by, 60–61
stages of awareness and acceptance of, 76
symptoms of, 13–19
agenda for, 13
time distortions and, 16
understanding, 6–8
dissociative amnesia, 15–16
dissociative disorder not otherwise specified (DDNOS), xi, xii, xiii, xiv, xvii, 10
basic functions of parts of personality and, 26
as complex posttraumatic stress disorder, 38
manual use and formal diagnosis of, 432
parts of personality with functions in daily life for people with, 26, 29
subtype 1b, DSM-V diagnostic criteria, 443
dissociative disorders
body perceptions and, 138–39
diagnosis of, 9–11
diagnostic assessment for, 415
experiencing fear without knowing why and, 280–81
intense emotions and, 206–7
remaining stuck in trauma-time and, 84
sexual boundary problems and, 397–98
time management problems and, 115–16
time pressures and, 327
Dissociative Disorders Interview Scale, 415
Dissociative Experiences Scale (DES), 415
dissociative identity disorder (DID), xi, xii, xiii, xiv, xvii, 8, 10
basic functions of parts of personality in and people with, 26
as complex posttraumatic stress disorder, 38
DSM-V diagnostic criteria, 443
executive control and, 27
failure of parts to accept the body as their own, 140
manual use and formal diagnosis of, 432
struggle for time among dissociative parts and, 100
dissociative individuals, inner world of, 25–28
dissociative intrusions, 18
dissociative parts of the personality, 8
agenda on beginning work with, 70
avoidance of anger and, 268
awareness of parts for each other, 26

counter-phobic, 282
as “decision-making centers,” 326–27
elaboration and autonomy of parts, 28
fixated in anger, 267–68
identifying and coping with, 43–45
images of “inner world” of, 25
influence of parts on each other, 26–27
isolation among, 367
negative judgments of emotions among, 207
number of parts, 28
relational models and, 344
self-harm and, 317
struggle for time among, 100
understanding, agenda for, 24
dissociative parts of yourself
first steps in working with, 72
initial dilemmas in working with, 71
recognizing, homework, 33, 77
reflection used with, 61–62
dissociative symptoms
identifying, homework, 32
recognizing, 21–22
dissociative table technique, 330–31
see also inner meeting room
distraction, 218–19, 255
doctor
appointments, 144
fear of, 141
driving, automatic, dissociation and, 19
dropouts, optimal outpatient skills-training group and, 420
drugs, sleep problems and, 100
DSM. see Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)
dysfunctional boundaries, 367
dysfunctional thoughts 245, 250–51
eating
with complete attention, 208–9
many meanings of, 150
tips for resolving inner conflicts about, 152–54
see also meals
eating habits
healthy, developing, 149–61
eating problems
complex dissociative disorder and, 151–52
improving, plan for, 156–57, 161
self-harm and, 316
educational meetings for significant others, 426–27, 435–36, 448
emotional intimacy, 361
emotional pain, abuse and, 139

emotional reasoning, 238–39
emotional signals, difficulty attending to, in the present, 207–8
emotion dysregulation, lack of reflection and, 216
emotion regulation, xi, xii
healing and, 214
impulse regulation and, xiii
emotions
agenda on understanding of, 203
avoidance of, 216–17
basic, and their functions of, 204–6
core beliefs and, 228
decision making and, 325
identifying, skills review, 255
identifying and understanding, homework, 210–11
intense, relationships and, 344
judging, 204–5
meeting our needs with, 205
mindfulness exercise and, 208–9
negative judgments of, among dissociative parts, 207
self-conscious, 205
sensory experience of, homework, 212
empathic acceptance, 220
empathic understanding, reflection and, 58–59
empathy
healthy personal relationships and, 345
toward yourself, 64–65, 92
estrangement from self or body, 16–17
estrangement from surroundings, 17–18
European Society for Trauma and Dissociation Web site, xiv
evaluation of course, 440
executive control, 27–28
executive functioning, 189
exercises
creating inner meeting space for decision making, 330–31
expansion of learning to be present: finding your anchors to the present, 19–20
experiencing an inner sense of safety, 87
finding common ground about relationships, 349–50
Healing Pool, 129
learning to be present, 5–6
mindfulness, 208–9
necklace of positive experiences, 240–41
store, 171–72
stress reduction and healing, 38–39
tree, 128–29
experiential avoidance, 52
facial expressions, 243
family time
current daily structure and, 119–222

realistic and healthy daily structure and, 121–22
fatigue, 142
fear
about relationships, 347
anxiety vs., 279
body perceived as object of, 138–39
chronic, 278
collapse mode and, 279
healthy, 279–80
inappropriate, 281
of inner experiences, 279
loneliness and, 368
of losing control, 71, 207
perception, judgment and effects of, 328
physiological reactions to, 278
posttraumatic stress disorder and, 35
reckless actions without, 282
reflecting on inner experience of, skills review, 335
reflecting on your experience of, 285–86
tips for coping with, 283–84
feedback
assertiveness and, 379
from group participants, 440
feedback loops, 205–6, 246–48
fight parts of personality, 30–31
final evaluation, 451–54
flashbacks, 18, 166, 167, 216
during nighttime, 98, 99
holidays and, 190
identifying, homework, 40
nighttime, 98, 99
posttraumatic stress disorder and, 35, 36
prolonged, healthy daily structure and reduction in, 112
self-harm and, 319
self-medicating with substances and, 141
shame and, 288–89
as you fall asleep, 99
flight-or-fight reaction, 278
food
eating with complete attention, 208–9
many meanings of, 150
food restriction, 151
forgetfulness, dissociative amnesia vs., 15
free time
complex dissociative disorder and problems with, 124–25
managing, tips for, 126–27
resolving inner conflicts about, 125–26
freezing
fear and, 283

relationships and, 347
shame and sense of, 288, 295
friends
current daily structure and, 119–20
realistic and healthy daily structure and, 121–22
goodbyes. see leave-taking session
grounding, coping with hyperarousal through, 220–21
ground rules, 424, 430–31, 434, 446–48
group composition issues, 420
group difficulties, 427–31
contact between sessions, 431
participants who are chronically late, 429
participants who are unable to stay present, 428–29
participants who discuss inappropriate content, 428
participants who must drop out prematurely, 429–30
participants who object to ground rules, 430–31
participants who talk too little or too much, 427–28
understanding and resolving, 427–31
group trainer’s guide, 413–33
assessment and diagnosis of potential course participants, 415–21
conducting course sessions, 423–27
contact and coordination with treating therapist, 421–23
trainer qualifications and guidelines, 414
understanding and resolving difficulties in group, 427–31
using manual in day-treatment and inpatient groups, 433
using manual in individual therapy, 432–33
guilt
agenda on coping with, 287
childhood trauma and feelings of, 44
chronic, 289, 295
coping with, homework, 299–300
coping with, skills review, 336
coping with, tips for coping with, 293–96
realistic, 295–96
self-harm and reduction of, 316
understanding, 288, 293
hallucinations
posttraumatic stress disorder and, 36
as you fall asleep, 99
hate
body perceived as object of, 138–39
feelings of, 264
head banging, 316, 430
healing
emotion regulation and, 214
free time and, 124
working with inner experiences and, 54

work/life balance and, 117
Healing Pool exercise, 129–30, 159, 180
healthy boundaries
agenda on setting, 392
characteristics of, 394–95
description of, 393–95
setting, cooperating with yourself and, 398–99
healthy core beliefs, 231
developing, about self, about others, and about the world, 234–35
developing, skills review, 257
healthy daily structure, 111–22
agenda on establishing, 111
establishing, 111–22
new, reflections on developing, 117–18
realistic, developing, 121–22
reflections on developing, 113–14
healthy eating habits
developing, 149–61
resolving inner conflicts about, tips for, 152–54
healthy relationships, 344–46
helper parts of personality, 30
here-and-now awareness, 4–6
“highway hypnosis,” 19
hobbies, 118, 119–20, 121–22
current daily structure and, 119–20
realistic and healthy daily structure and, 121–22
holidays, managing, 190–91
home, creating safe spaces in, 86
humiliation, 169
humor, 379
hunger, 142, 152
hyperarousal, 36–37, 40, 214, 217–21, 225–26, 255, 279
hypoarousal, 37, 41, 221–23, 215, 221, 225–26, 255, 283
ICD. see International Classification of Diseases (ICD)
identity, 14–15
illicit drugs, 141–42
illusions, 99
imagery-based inner experiences, 306
imaginal rehearsals, 179–80, 195, 385–86, 391, 399
imaginary inner safe places, 84–86
imaginary rehearsals, 195
inaccurate thoughts, challenging, skills review, 258
inner awareness, forms of, 72–74
inner child parts of self, 301–11, 336
inner communication 73–75, 78–81, 91
inner cooperation, 312–13, 323–39, 384–86
inner deliberation, time for, 114
inner empathy, xiii

inner experiences
avoiding, becoming aware of, 55–56
defined, 51
fear of, 279
noticing without judgment, 64
reflecting on, 68–69, 91
inner meeting room, 384, 398
see also dissociative table technique
inner meetings, 75, 330–31, 332, 338, 390–91
inner orientation, 181–82, 186
inner reflection
current daily structure and, 119–20
realistic and healthy daily structure and, 121–22
time for, 118
inner safe places, 195
angry parts in, 271
imaginary, examples of, 85–86
inner sense of safety
developing, 83–86, 93
developing, homework, 88–89
experiencing, exercise for, 87
relaxation and, 127–28
inner voices, various dissociative parts of the self and, 73
inner world of dissociative individuals
awareness of parts for each other, 26
basic functions of parts of the personality, 25–26
elaboration and autonomy of parts, 28
executive control, 27–28
images of “inner world” of dissociative parts, 25
influence of parts on each other, 26–27
number of parts, 28
inpatient groups, 433
insecure relationships, 352–53, 406
intake session, 419
integration, 7
intense emotions, dissociative disorder and, 206–7
interactive regulation, 215
internal triggers, 170
International Classification of Diseases (ICD), 10
International Society for the Study of Trauma and Dissociation (ISSTD), xi, xiv
Interview for Dissociative Disorders and Trauma-Related Symptoms, 415
introductory session, 434–36
intrusions, 18, 27, 36, 40
dissociation and, 18
identifying symptoms of, homework, 40
posttraumatic stress disorder and, 36
involuntariness, 14
isolation, 36, 40, 115, 290–92, 365–76, 407
see also loneliness

ISSTD. see International Society for the Study of Trauma and Dissociation
(ISSTD)
“I” statements, 379
judging emotions, 204–5
judgment, effects of fear and anxiety on decision making and, 328
lax boundaries, 367, 395–96
learning to be present, 4–6, 11, 19–20, 46
leave-taking rituals, 427, 439-40
leave-taking session, 437–42
educational meeting for significant others, 435–36
evaluation of course, 440
explanation of ground rules, 434
final session agenda, 441
leave-taking rituals, 439–40
making the most of skills-training course, 435
saying goodbye to group, 438–39
saying goodbye to group, homework, 441–42
see also introductory session; training course sessions
leisure time, 112, 119–22, 124–25, 135–36
balanced distribution of, 112
complex dissociative disorder and problems with, 124–25
current daily structure and, 119–20
exploring inner obstacles to, 135–36
realistic and healthy daily structure and, 121–22
liquid nutritional supplements, 154
listening, reflective, assertiveness and, 379
lists, 116
loneliness, 141, 190–92, 365–76, 407
agenda on coping with, 365
coping with, 365–76
coping with, tips for, 369–71
coping with difficult times and, 191–92
defined, 365–66
dysfunctional boundaries and, 367
fear, shame, and, 368
holidays and, 190
as reenactment of the past, 368
reflecting on a time of, homework, 372–73
reflections on your experience of, 368–69
resolving, homework skills for, 374–76
resolving, skills review, 407
self-medicating with substances and, 141
understanding, 367–68
see also isolation
losing control, fear of, 207
lost time, complex dissociative disorder and, 189

magnification, 238
meals, 119–22, 150–55
see also eating
meaning, 45
medical appointments, 191
medical problems, 45
meditation, 370
mementos, for leave-taking rituals, 439–40
memories, 15–16
see also traumatic memories
menstruation, 170
mental filtering, 238
mentalization, xiii, 58
mindfulness, xiii
mindfulness exercise, 208–9, 254
mindfulness and mentalization based treatments, xi–xii
mistakes, 346
mistrust, 366
Multidimensional Inventory for Dissociation, 415
music, calming and soothing yourself with, 220
“necklace of positive experiences” exercise, 240–41, 257
negative core beliefs, 229–33, 256
negative feedback loops, 246
neglect, 138, 366, 417
negotiation
assertiveness and, 385
healthy boundary setting and, 398–99
nightmares, 35, 36, 98, 99, 104–5
nonverbal parts, 307
numbness, 17, 35, 36, 40, 139–40, 214, 222–23, 281
nutrition, 150–55
obesity, 150
optimal level of closeness and distance, 402, 409
overgeneralizing, 238
overwhelming emotions, 188, 208
pain sensitivity, 139
panic, 26, 36, 98, 99, 279, 327
partial intrusion, 26
participant contract, for skills-training group, 449–50
parts of the personality, 29–31
see also dissociative parts of the personality
passive influence, 26
past, distinguishing from the present, 180–81
perceptions, 205–6, 228, 328
perpetrators, 267–68
personal boundaries, 392–410

personality
basic functions of parts of, 25–26
dissociative parts of, 8, 14–15
integration and, 7
personal organizers, 115
personal reflection, 114
personal space, optimal level of closeness and distance and, 402, 409
pets, 101, 113, 370
phobia of attachment
development of, 346
difficulties with regulation and, 346–48
isolation and, 366
loneliness and, 368
relational conflict and, 358
rigid boundaries and, 396
phobia of attachment loss
development of, 346
difficulties with regulation and, 348–49
loneliness and, 368
relational conflict and, 358
rigid boundaries and, 396
phobia for dissociative parts of the personality, 31, 71
phobia of inner experience
becoming aware of avoiding inner experience, 55–56
developing, 53–54
overcoming, 90
physical self-care as trigger of, 140
skills review, 90–93
understanding, 52–53
phobias
common perceptions of, 52
relational, 346–49
physical energy, 142
physical examinations, fear of doctors or, 141
physical exercise, 114–15, 118
physical relaxation, 130
physical self-care, 137–48
physiological arousal, 214
physiological dysregulation, 35
planning, effective, tips for, 193–94
positive experiences, triggers for, 170
positive triggers, 176
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 10, 40–42, 345–98, 443–44
predictions, core beliefs and, 228
premature (arbitrary) conclusions, 238
prereflective reaction, 59
prescription medications, 141–42
present moment
anchors to, 19–20

being in, 4–5
difficulty attending to emotional signals in, 207–8
distinguishing the past from, 180–81
inner sense of safety and, 84
orienting to, skills review, 255
overwhelming feelings in, 188
safe anchors to, 23
primary care physicians, choosing, 141
priority setting, 189
progressive muscle relaxation, 131–32, 159
protective imagery, 186
pseudo-seizures, 430
psychiatric medications, 142
psychotic disorders, dissociative disorders vs., 415
PTSD. see posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
purging, 151
rage, 30, 169, 264
rape victims, 35
reactivated traumatic memories, 166
see also traumatic memories
realistic core beliefs, 231, 234–35, 257, 259
realistic positive thoughts and beliefs, 252–53
reassurance, 220–21
reckless actions, 282
reflection
on anger, 270, 272
assertiveness and, 384–85
automatic thoughts and, 247
complex dissociative disorder and problems with, 59–61
developing new healthy daily structure and, 117–18
emotional dysregulation and lack of, 216
empathic understanding of yourself and others through, 58–59, 62–63
on experiences of isolation and loneliness, 368–69
healthy boundary setting and, 398
on inner experience, 68–69, 91
learning about, 57–69
problems with, 59–61
time for, 114
reflective functioning, 58, 59
reflective listening, 379
reflective skills, to identify and explore cognitive distortions, 239–40
reflective skills development, 63–65
regulation
phobia of attachment and difficulties with, 346–498
phobia of attachment loss and difficulties with, 348–49
rejection, 169
rejuvenation, 124
relational closeness and distance, optimal, 394

relational conflicts
basic skills for resolving, 357–58
calming and containing angry parts of yourself, 361–62
conflict management skills and, homework, 363–64
observing how others relate, 358–59
orienting parts to the present, 360
protecting vulnerable parts of yourself, 361
reflecting on your own and other person’s intentions and actions, 359–60
resolving, 356–64
supporting avoidant parts to deal with conflict, 360–61
time-outs from, 359
relational models, 344
relational phobias, 346
relational regulation, 215–16, 346, 354–55, 406
relational triggers, 169–70
relationships
complex PTSD and changes in, 45
finding inner common ground about, 349–51, 405
interpersonal trauma and effect on, 346
see also healthy relationships
relaxation, 47, 84, 114, 124, 125–28, 135–36, 144
relaxation exercises, 128–31
Healing Pool exercise, 129–30, 159
physical relaxation exercise, 130
progressive muscle relaxation technique, 131–32, 159
Tree exercise, 128–29, 159
relaxation kit, 133–34, 160, 191, 217
release of information, 419, 448
respect, 345
rest, 142, 144, 220
see also sleep
retrospective reflection
with chronic reaction to an emotion, 61
with dissociative part of yourself, 61–62
revenge, feelings of, 264
rigid boundaries, 367, 396, 397
risky behaviors, 316
routine, 115
safe places
developing sense of, 93
developing sense of, homework, 88–89
imagery of, 83
safe present, anchors to the present and, 19–20
safe relationships, 345
safety, xi
see also inner sense of safety
Schedler-Westen Assessment Procedure-200 for personality disorders, 415
SCID-II. see Structured Clinical Interview for DSM Personality Disorders

SDQ-20. see Somatoform Dissociation Questionnaire (SDQ-20)
seasons, difficult feelings and triggers related to, 190, 191
secure relationships, 352–53, 406
self, sense of, 7–8
self-awareness, 58
self-conscious emotions, 205
self-harm, xi, 314–22, 337, 338, 366
self-loathing, 150
self-medication, 141–42
self-perception, 44
self-regulation, 346, 354–55
sense of self, 7–8, 14–15
sensory awareness, 220
sensory triggers, 170
severe dissociative symptoms, 418
sexual abuse, 139, 397
sexual boundary problems, 397–98
sexual intimacy, 361
shame, 44, 52, 138–39, 150, 169, 216, 264, 288–96, 316, 335, 347, 368
shame scripts, 290–93
attack others, 290, 291–92
attack self, 290, 291
avoidance of inner experience, 290, 292–93
withdrawal from others (isolation), 290, 292
shopping, 113
fear around, 281
for food, 151, 152, 153, 155, 156–57
lists for, 116
“should/ought to” statements, 239
“sibling rivalry” transferences, 417
skills-training group
final evaluation, 451–54
ground rules for, 446–48
participant contract for, 449–50
skills-training manual
development of, xiii–xiv
introductory session, 433
use in day-treatment and inpatient groups, 433
use in individual therapy, 432, 433
sleep, 97, 101–2, 144
sleep apnea, 98
sleep disorders, 98
sleep kit, 101, 109, 158
sleep medication, 105
sleep problems, 99–105
sleep quality, improving, 100–102
sleep record, 106–7
sleep routine
addressing obstacles to, 110

establishing, 102
sleepwalking, 98, 99
social anxiety, xi
socializing, 115, 121–22, 118
somatic symptoms, 45
somatoform dissociation, measuring, 415
Somatoform Dissociation Questionnaire (SDQ-20), 415
spacing out, 19
startle reflex, 35
“start-stop” behavior, 113
STEPPS. see systems training for emotional predictability and problem solving
Store exercise, 171–72, 180, 186, 199
stress ball, 38, 47
stress reduction, 38-9, 47
structure, 115
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Dissociative Disorders, Revised, 415
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM Personality Disorders, 415
substance abuse, 35, 141-42, 316, 347, 430
suicidal behavior, 318
suicide, loneliness and, 366
support, inner, 181–82
survival mechanisms, 53
switching, 27, 28, 303–4, 403
sympathetic nervous system, 278
systems training for emotional predictability and problem solving (STEPPS), xi,
xiii
“talking inwardly,” 75
tardiness, 429
TARGET. see trauma adaptive recovery group education and therapy (TARGET)
tasks, 119–22
teaching
course topics, 425
skills exercises, 424–25
telephone contact between sessions, 431
therapeutic alliance, 432
therapists
referrals to skills group and motivations of, 422–23
trainer contact and coordination with, 421–22
thirst, 142, 152
thoughts
challenging, reflections for understanding, 248–49
core beliefs and, 228
decision making and, 325
exploring, when you have complex dissociative disorder, 248–49
feedback loops of, 205–6
inaccurate, challenging, homework, 250–51
realistic, developing, 252–53
threatening situations, failure to feel fear in, 281–82

thrill seeking, 214
time, keeping track of, 115–16
time distortions, 16, 19
time loss, 16, 189
time management, 189
time-outs
from anger, 270, 272
assertiveness and, 386
conflict management skills and, 363
relational conflicts and, 359
skills-training group and, 447
time pressure, decision making and, 327–28
time-related triggers, 169
tiredness, 98
tobacco use, 100
trainers
contact and coordination with treating therapist, 421–22
division of group tasks among, 414
qualifications and guidelines for, 414
role of, 446
training course sessions
conducting, 423–27
educational meeting for significant others, 426–27
ending the course, 427
format of, 424
ground rules, 423–24
homework, 425–26
introductory session, 423
teaching course topics, 425
teaching skills exercise, 424–25
see also introductory session; leave-taking session
trance-like behavior, 19
transference issues, 417
trauma
dissociation and, 8
healthy eating and healing from, 149–61
isolation as reenactment of, 367
relationships and effect of, 346
sleep problems and, 99–100
trauma adaptive recovery group education and therapy (TARGET), xii
traumatic memories
autobiographical memories and, 166
avoiding situations or experiences related to, 26
PTSD and intrusion of, 35
trauma-time, 26, 31, 230, 237, 358
traumatizing experiences
ashamed parts holding onto, 31
fight parts holding onto, 30–31
helper parts holding onto, 30

parts imitating people who hurt you holding onto, 30
parts of personality holding onto, 29–31
young parts holding onto, 29–30
Tree exercise, 128–29, 159, 180
triggers
agenda on coping with, 177
agenda on understanding, 165
of anger, 270–71
anticipating, 179
conflicts in relationships and, 358
coping with, 177–85
distinguishing the past from the present, 180–82
eliminating or avoiding, 178
of fear, identifying, 283
identifying, 173–74
identifying and coping with, 183–84
identifying and coping with, skills review, 200
imaginal rehearsal, 179–80
neutralizing effects of, 180
overwhelming emotions evoked by, 208
positive, identifying, 176
for positive experiences, 170
posttraumatic stress disorder and, 36
recognizing, 167–68
recognizing options to, 180
reflecting on reactions to, 175
removing from bedroom, 101, 108
self-harm and, 318, 319
sexual, 397
skills to cope with, 185–86
store exercise and coping with, 171–72
types of, 168–70
understanding, 166–67
vulnerability to, 168
trust problems, 346
unconscious avoidance, 53
understanding other people through reflection, 62–63
unhealthy boundaries, 395–96
volunteering, 113, 192
vulnerable parts of yourself, protecting, in relational conflicts, 361
weekends, difficult feelings and triggers related to, 190
weekly structure, 112
well-being, 84
WHO. see World Health Organization (WHO)
window of tolerance, 214–17
withdrawal from others, shame script and, 290–92

work, 112, 113, 119–20, 121–22
work habits, healthy, 116–17
World Health Organization (WHO), 10
written forms of communication, to yourself, 74–75
young parts of self
goals for working with, 304–5
holding traumatizing experiences, 29–30
problems related to switching to, in daily life, 303–4
understanding, 302–4
working with, 305–7
“you” statements, 379

Diagnostic Criteria in Appendix A reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision.
(Copyright 2000). American Psychiatric Association.
Copyright © 2011 by Suzette Boon, Kathy Steele, and Onno van der Hart
All rights reserved
First Edition
For information about permission to reproduce selections from this book, write to
Permissions, W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY
10110
For information about special discounts for bulk purchases, please contact W. W.
Norton Special Sales at specialsales@wwnorton.com or 800-233-4830
Book design by Gilda Hannah
Production manager: Leeann Graham
The Library of Congress has cataloged the printed edition as follows:
Boon, Suzette.
Coping with trauma-related dissociation : skills training for patients and
therapists / Suzette Boon, Kathy Steele, Onno van der Hart. — 1st ed.
p. cm. – (A Norton professional book)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-393-70646-8 (hardcover)
1. Dissociative disorders. 2. Psychic trauma—Complications. 3. Post-
traumatic stress disorder—Complications. I. Steele, Kathy. II. Hart, Onno van der,
1941– III. Title.
RC553.D5B657 2011
616.85'21—dc22       2010044302
ISBN 978-0-393-70678-9 (e-book)
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110
www.wwnorton.com
W. W. Norton & Company Ltd., Castle House, 75/76 Wells Street, London W1T
3QT

Table of Contents
Title
2
Contents
4
Preface
7
A Personal Word to Patients
12
Introduction for Patients
14
Part One: Understanding Dissociation and Trauma-Related
Disorders
17
1. Understanding Dissociation
18
2. Symptoms of Dissociation
29
3. Understanding Dissociative Parts of the Personality
40
4. Symptoms of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) in Complex
Dissociative Disorders
51
Part One Skills Review
65
Part Two: Initial Skills for Coping With Dissociation
67
5. Overcoming the Phobia of Inner Experience
68
6. Learning to Reflect
75
7. Beginning Work With Dissociative Parts
86
8. Developing an Inner Sense of Safety
98
Part Two Skills Review
106
Part Three: Improving Daily Life
109
9. Improving Sleep
110
10. Establishing a Healthy Daily Structure
125
11. Free Time and Relaxation
136
12. Physical Self-Care
152
13. Developing Healthy Eating Habits
166
Part Three Skills Review
176
Part Four: Coping With Trauma-Related Triggers and
Memories
179
14. Understanding Traumatic Memories and Triggers
180
15. Coping With Triggers
192
16. Planning for Difficult Times
202
Part Four Skills Review
215
Part Five: Understanding Emotions and Cognitions
217
17. Understanding Emotions
218
18. The Window of Tolerance: Learning to Regulate Yourself
229
19. Understanding Core Beliefs
243

20. Identifying Cognitive Errors
252
21. Challenging Dysfunctional Thoughts and Core Beliefs
262
Part Five Skills Review
271
Part Six: Advanced Coping Skills
275
22. Coping With Anger
276
23. Coping With Fear
292
24. Coping With Shame and Guilt
301
25. Coping With the Needs of Inner Child Parts
314
26. Coping With Self-Harm
327
27. Improving Decision Making Through Inner Cooperation
337
Part Six Skills Review
350
Part Seven: Improving Relationships With Others
354
28. The Phobias of Attachment and Attachment Loss
355
29. Resolving Relational Conflict
369
30. Coping With Isolation and Loneliness
378
31. Learning to Be Assertive
388
32. Setting Healthy Personal Boundaries
403
Part Seven Skills Review
416
Part Eight: Guide for Group Trainers
420
33. Guide for Group Trainers
421
34. Introductory Session
445
35. Leave-Taking Sessions
448
Appendices
454
A. DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria
454
B. Ground Rules for a Skills-Training Group
457
C. Participant Contract for a Skills-Training Group
461
D. Skills-Training Group Final Evaluation
463
References
466
Acknowledgments
473
Index
474
Copyright
497
