Bipolar  
disorder
An  
information 
guide
revised edition
CAMH Bipolar Clinic Staff

Bipolar  
disorder
An  
information 
guide
revised edition
CAMH Bipolar Clinic Staff

Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication
Bipolar disorder : an information guide / CAMH Bipolar Clinic staff ; 
[contributors, Sagar Parikh ... [et al.]]. -- Revised edition. 
Includes bibliographical references.
Issued in print and electronic formats.
isbn: 978-1-77052-579-5 (print)
isbn: 978-1-77052-580-1 (pdf)
isbn: 978-1-77052-581-8 (html)
isbn: 978-1-77052-582-5 (epub)
          1. Manic-depressive illness--Popular works.  I. Parikh, Sagar V., 
author  II. Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, issuing body 
RC516.B567 2013                            616.89’5                          C2013-905614-9 
                                                                                                  C2013-905615-7 
Printed in Canada
Copyright © 2000, 2013 Centre for Addiction and Mental Health
No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or by any information 
storage and retrieval system without written permission from the publisher—except for  
a brief quotation (not to exceed 200 words) in a review or professional work.
This publication may be available in other formats. For information about  
alternate formats or other camh publications, or to place an order, please  
contact Sales and Distribution:
Toll-free: 1 800 661-1111 
Toronto: 416 595-6059
E-mail: publications@camh.ca
Online store: http://store.camh.ca
Website: www.camh.ca
Disponible en français sous le titre :
Le trouble bipolaire : Guide d’information
This guide was produced by camh’s Knowledge and Innovation Support Unit. 
3973f / 01-2014 / PM105

Contents
Authorship	
v
Acknowledgments	
vi
Introduction 	
vii
1	
What is bipolar disorder? 	
1
Why is bipolar disorder called an “illness”?
How common is bipolar disorder? 
When does bipolar disorder begin?
2	
The clinical features of bipolar disorder 	
3
The episodes of bipolar disorder
Types of bipolar disorder
Order and frequency of the various states
3	
The symptoms of bipolar disorder 	
5
Mania
Hypomania 
Mixed state
Depression
Other symptoms of a bipolar episode
“Comorbidity” and its importance
4	
What causes bipolar disorder? 	
12
What is a “trigger” for a bipolar episode?
5	
Treatments for bipolar disorder 	
14
Biological treatments
Psychosocial treatments
Hospitalization

6	
Recovery and relapse prevention 	
32
The process of recovery
Preventing relapse and promoting wellness
Practical aspects of recovery
Recognizing and responding to early warning  
	 signs and triggers
7	
Help for partners and families 	
42
What happens when someone you love has  
	 bipolar disorder?
Depression
Mania
Getting treatment for your family member 
Care for partners and families
Being ready for a relapse or crisis
Tips for helping your family member and  
	 supporting recovery
8	
Explaining bipolar disorder to children 	
56
Glossary 	
60
Resources 	
65

v
Authorship
Bipolar disorder is an often-complex disorder that requires many dif-
ferent types of knowledge and expertise to treat. Effective treatment 
is usually collaborative and multidisciplinary; so too was the writing 
of this guide. We have stated authorship as the “Bipolar Clinic Staff” 
to reflect our commitment to collaboration. For the record, the con-
tributors to the guide include Sagar Parikh, md, frcpc; Carol Parker, 
msw, rsw; Robert Cooke, md, frcpc; Stephanie Krüger, md; Roger 
McIntyre, md, frcpc; Alice Kusznir, ot, med; and Christina Bartha, 
msw, rsw. Additional input was provided by Lynnette Ashton, Mary 
Damianakis, Deborah Mancini and Lisa Zetes-Zanatta.

vi
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to pay special tribute to our patients, clients 
and their families who, through their openness, have taught us so 
much. We would also like to express our sincere appreciation to the 
patients, clients and family members who gave so generously of their 
time in reviewing the manuscript and who provided their thoughtful 
comments and suggestions.
This revised edition was reviewed by Dr. Hagen Rampes.

vii
Introduction
This guide is for people with bipolar disorder, their families and 
anyone who wants to understand the basics of this illness and its 
treatment and management. It is not a substitute for treatment from 
a doctor or mental health care provider, but it can be used as a basis 
for questions and discussion about bipolar disorder. This handbook 
covers many aspects of bipolar disorder and answers frequently 
asked questions. With respect to drug treatments, new medications 
are continually being developed, and some current medications may 
not yet have been available when this guide was published.


1 What is bipolar disorder? 
Why is bipolar disorder called an  
“illness”?
Everyone has ups and downs in mood. Feeling happy, sad and angry 
is normal. Bipolar disorder (or manic-depressive illness, as it used to 
be called) is a medical condition in which people have extreme mood 
swings. Their moods may have nothing to do with things going on 
in their lives. These swings do not only affect mood, they also affect 
how people think, behave and function.
Bipolar disorder is no one’s fault. It does not come from a “weak” 
or unstable personality. It is a medical disorder that can be treated.
How common is bipolar disorder? 
You or someone you care about may have been diagnosed with 
bipolar disorder. You may now feel alone in facing the problems 
of the illness, but you are not alone. About one to two per cent of 
adults worldwide suffer from bipolar disorder. Men and women 
are affected equally.

2
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
When does bipolar disorder begin?
More and more, the first signs of bipolar disorder are being recog-
nized in adolescence or early adulthood. Yet the younger the person 
is when the symptoms first develop, the less typical the symptoms 
may be. The symptoms may be mistaken for teenage distress or 
rebellion, so bipolar disorder is often not diagnosed until adulthood.
In some women, bipolar disorder may appear during pregnancy or 
shortly after it. Mania, or a “high,” after pregnancy occurs in only 
about one mother in a thousand. Postpartum depression is more 
common (see pages 5–9 for symptoms of mania and depression). If 
you or someone you care about has developed depressive symptoms 
after giving birth, and these symptoms are severe or last more than 
two weeks, you or she should seek help.

2 The clinical features of  
bipolar disorder
The episodes of bipolar disorder
Bipolar disorder is an episodic (that is, recurring) disorder. It typically 
consists of three states:
•	a high state, called mania 
•	a low state, called depression
•	a well state, during which many people feel normal and  
function well.
The manias and depressions may be either “pure” episodes (they 
have only typical manic or depressive symptoms) or they may be 
mixed episodes (they may consist of a mixture of both manic and 
depressive symptoms at the same time). Traditionally, mixed epi-
sodes have been associated with the manic phase of the illness, so 
terms such as “mixed mania” or “dysphoric mania” are often used 
to describe mixed states.

4
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
Types of bipolar disorder
Some people experience manic (or mixed), depressed and well 
phases during their illness. Such people are said to have bipolar-I 
disorder. A milder form of mania is called “hypomania.” People 
who have hypomania, depression and intervals without symptoms, 
but no full manic phases, are said to have bipolar-II disorder. 
Order and frequency of the various 
states
The manic/hypomanic, mixed and depressive states usually do not 
occur in a certain order, and their frequency cannot be predicted. 
For many people there are years between each episode, whereas 
others suffer more frequent episodes. Over a lifetime, the average 
person with bipolar disorder experiences about 10 episodes of 
depression and mania/hypomania or mixed states. As the person 
ages, the episodes of illness often come closer together. Untreated 
manias often last for two to three months. Untreated depressions 
usually last longer, between four and six months.
RAPID CYCLING
About 20 per cent of people with bipolar disorder have four or more 
(sometimes many more) episodes a year. People with four or more 
episodes a year are said to be having rapid cycling, which is a sub-
type of bipolar disorder that needs specific treatment. We don’t know 
for certain what causes rapid cycling. Sometimes, its occurrence may 
be triggered by certain antidepressants, but how the antidepressant 
causes rapid cycling is not clear. Sometimes stopping the antidepres-
sant may help the person to return to a “normal” cycling pattern.

3 The symptoms of  
bipolar disorder
Mania
Sometimes, a person may seem abnormally and continuously high, 
irritable or expansive for at least one week. If this change in mood is 
accompanied by other symptoms (see below) the person may be in 
a manic phase of bipolar disorder. Not everybody who enters a manic 
phase feels happy or euphoric. Instead, a person may feel very irritable, 
or may be terribly angry, disruptive and aggressive.
People in a manic phase do not have only mood symptoms. For a 
manic episode to be diagnosed, they must also have at least three 
of the following symptoms to an important degree: 
•	Exaggerated self-esteem or feeling of grandeur: People feel invin-
cible or all-powerful; they believe they understand “how the world 
works” or how to save it. They may feel they have a special mission 
in life (e.g., that God has sent them or given them special powers).
•	Less need for sleep: People feel rested after just a few hours of sleep. 
Sometimes they may not sleep at all for a few days or even weeks.

6
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
•	Increased talking: People may talk very quickly, too loudly and much 
more than usual. They may like to tell jokes or rhyme words and 
may become angry when interrupted. They may keep switching 
topics and be unable to converse properly with others.
•	Flight of ideas or racing thoughts: People easily lose their train 
of thought, and have trouble interacting because they are easily 
distracted. They may be impatient with others who cannot follow 
their fast thinking and changing plans and ideas.
•	Speeded-up activity: People may socialize more than usual at work 
or school, or may be much more active, with seemingly boundless 
energy. In the early manic phase, they may be productive, but as 
symptoms worsen, people are more frantic in their activities and 
start many projects without finishing them.
•	Poor judgment: People may not be able to control or plan how 
they act. They may take part in unusual and risky activities without 
realizing the harmful consequences (e.g., shopping sprees, bad 
business choices and bad decisions). They may become more 
sexually active and take less care in choosing their sexual partners. 
This increased sexual activity may lead to unwanted pregnancies, 
sexually transmitted diseases, guilt and disrupted relationships.
•	Psychotic symptoms: People may experience symptoms of psy-
chosis, such as delusions (beliefs that are not based in reality). 
They may also have hallucinations—most often, they hear voices 
that are not really there.

7
The symptoms of bipolar disorder
Hypomania 
The symptoms of hypomania are less severe than those of mania, 
but may still be disruptive. People may feel happy and have lots  
of energy, but do not usually get into serious trouble. Hypomania 
may progress to a full-blown manic episode or a severe depression, 
and therefore needs treatment.
Mixed state
Some people do not always have “pure” manic or depressive 
episodes. Instead, they may experience episodes in which manic 
and depressive symptoms occur at the same time. This is called a 
“mixed state.” For example, someone in a mixed state may think 
and speak very rapidly. At the same time, the person may be very 
anxious and have suicidal thoughts. Mixed states are hard to diag-
nose and are very painful for the individual.
Depression
Depression can take many forms, and it often comes out of nowhere. 
For a major depressive episode to be diagnosed, the symptoms must 
last for at least two weeks, and must be present most days and last 
most of the day. Symptoms of depression in bipolar disorder include 
at least five of the following:
Depressed mood: The mood state in depression differs substantially 
from normal sadness. In fact, many people experiencing depression  
say they cannot feel sadness, and many people cannot cry when 
depressed. Being able to cry again often means the depression is 
improving.

8
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
Marked loss of interest or pleasure in activities that used to be fun:  
When people have just begun to feel depressed or are mildly de-
pressed, they can still enjoy things, and may also be distracted by 
pleasurable activities. When people are severely depressed, they 
lose these abilities.
Weight loss or weight gain: Many people lose weight when depressed, 
partly because they lose their appetite. However, one subgroup feels 
hungrier, and may develop a craving for carbohydrate-rich and fatty 
foods. This results in weight gain. Metabolism may also increase or 
slow down, depending on the type of depression; such changes in 
metabolism can cause either weight loss or weight gain.
Sleep problems: Sleep disturbance is common in depression. Many 
people suffer from insomnia: they have trouble falling asleep, wake 
up often during the night or wake very early in the morning. People 
do not see sleep as being restful, and they may wake up feeling 
exhausted. Other people oversleep, especially during the day; they 
are said to have “hypersomnia.” 
Apathy or agitation: Many people with depression develop slowed-
down movement, speech or thinking. In severe cases, people with 
depression may be unable to move, speak and respond to their 
environment. For some people, the opposite happens, and they 
are very agitated. They are tormented by a severe inner restless-
ness—they cannot sit still, they pace, they may wring their hands. 
They may also show their agitation in other ways. People who feel 
agitated often feel very anxious, too.
Loss of energy: People experiencing depression find it hard to com-
plete everyday chores. It takes them longer to perform at work or at 
home because they lack energy and drive.

9
The symptoms of bipolar disorder
Worthlessness and guilt: When depressed, people may lack self-
confidence. They may not assert themselves, and they may be over-
whelmed by feelings of worthlessness. Many people cannot stop 
thinking about past events. They obsess about having let others 
down or having said the wrong things—and they feel very guilty. 
In severe cases, the guilt may cause delusions; that is, people 
feel sure that they have sinned and need to be punished for their 
wrongdoings. Or they may believe that God is punishing them 
for their past mistakes.
Inability to concentrate or decide: These symptoms may be so bad 
that people cannot do simple tasks. They may have trouble deciding 
on very small matters.
Suicidal thoughts: People who are depressed often think that life is 
not worth living or that they would be better off dead. The risk of act-
ing upon these thoughts is high, and many people do try to commit 
suicide when depressed. 
Psychotic symptoms: Symptoms of psychosis in depression may 
include false beliefs about being poor or being punished for past 
sins. People may believe that they have a deadly disease, such as 
cancer. They may also hear voices (auditory hallucinations) or may 
see things that do not exist (visual hallucinations).
Depressive symptoms also often include:
•	severe anxiety 
•	worries about small matters
•	complaints about physical symptoms, including pain
•	many visits to the family doctor for various physical symptoms.

10
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
Other symptoms of a bipolar episode
Some people with bipolar disorder may have problems with move-
ment during their episodes. These disturbances of movement (mo-
tor symptoms) occur in up to 25 per cent of patients with depression 
and up to 28 per cent of patients with mixed or pure manic episodes. 
These motor problems—called catatonic symptoms—vary and may 
include extreme physical agitation, slowness, or odd movements or 
postures. Sometimes people can’t be slowed down; others may move 
so little that they refuse even to open their mouth to eat, drink or 
speak. This is a serious risk to their physical health. In most cases, 
people become free of catatonic symptoms after specific treatment. 
There is a risk that people with catatonic symptoms may be mis-
diagnosed, because these symptoms have been traditionally associ-
ated with schizophrenia, rather than bipolar disorder. 
Comorbidity and its importance
A comorbid disorder is an illness or medical condition that occurs 
together with another illness or medical condition. Comorbid 
conditions can occur with bipolar disorder—they can start either 
before a bipolar illness or at the same time. Experts do not know 
why some disorders co-occur frequently with bipolar disorder and 
others do not. The severity of the comorbid condition may change 
over a lifetime, and its symptoms may also vary as the bipolar 
disorder changes. 
For example, one of the most common comorbid conditions is 
alcohol or other drug problems. People with an alcohol problem 
may drink too much during mania, or they may experiment with 
other drugs, because they feel free and they are impulsive. They 

11
The symptoms of bipolar disorder
may also use drugs during depressive phases, because they be-
lieve it helps them to feel less depressed. The same people may 
not abuse alcohol or other drugs during their well phase.
Psychiatric conditions that often co-occur with bipolar disorder:
•	panic disorder
•	obsessive-compulsive disorder 
•	binge eating disorder
•	substance abuse
•	attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
•	borderline personality disorder
It is important to diagnose comorbidity in bipolar disorder. Comor-
bid conditions may cloud the clinical picture and complicate treat-
ment of bipolar disorder. Also, the comorbid conditions are often 
so severe that they too need treating.

4 What causes bipolar  
disorder?
Several factors are involved in causing bipolar disorder, and the 
precise mechanism is not known. However, there is strong evidence 
that biological factors, including genetics, play an important role. 
This does not mean that a person has to inherit the genes: the genes 
involved may be altered when a person is conceived.
Genes are the blueprint for all the body’s cells and their contents. 
Scientists believe that changes to genes can lead to faulty proteins 
being produced within brain cells, which may then result in bipolar 
disorder. Researchers today are looking at genes themselves, as 
well as various proteins that may be affected in bipolar disorder. 
These include:
•	proteins involved in making neurotransmitters (“chemical  
messengers” in the brain)
•	proteins that use neurotransmitters to make cells do something.
We do know that bipolar disorder is not caused by too much stress 
or difficult family relationships. However, these factors may trigger 
an episode in someone who already has the illness. Nor is bipolar 
disorder a simple imbalance of neurotransmitters, such as serotonin 
or dopamine. Yet neurotransmitters may be affected during a flare-
up of the illness.

13
What causes bipolar disorder?
What is a trigger for a bipolar episode?
Not all episodes can be related to any particular trigger, but many 
can. Triggers are situations that can provoke either mania or depres-
sion in someone who has already had an episode of illness. Feeling 
very stressed or continually losing sleep is an example of this kind of 
trigger. Other triggers are chemical, and include antidepressants that 
work “too well” and result in mania; common medications, such as 
steroids (for instance, prednisone used for treating asthma, arthritis, 
etc.); and street drugs, such as cocaine and amphetamines.

5 Treatments for bipolar  
disorder
Treatment of bipolar disorder includes biological treatments (e.g., 
medications) and psychosocial treatments (e.g., psychoeducation, 
psychotherapy). Often both types of treatment are needed, but 
usually biological treatment is needed first to bring symptoms 
under control.
Biological treatments
Because bipolar disorder is an illness with a strong biological com-
ponent, the main forms of treatment are biological. These consist 
mainly of medications, but also include other treatments, such as 
light therapy (spending time every day under a specially designed 
light box) electroconvulsive therapy (ect) and transcranial magnetic 
stimulation (tms), which is being researched as an alternative to ect.
MEDICATIONS
Some of the information in this section is summarized from the 
camh pamphlet series Understanding Psychiatric Medications. The 
pamphlets are designed to help people better understand and make 

15
Treatments for bipolar disorder
choices about psychiatric drugs. They discuss what the drugs are 
used for, the different types and names of drugs, their effects and 
their place in the treatment of mental health problems. An online 
version is available at www.camh.ca.
Medications are the cornerstone of treatment in bipolar disorder—
they are needed to restore and promote wellness, and to prevent the 
return of symptoms. Several types of medications are commonly 
prescribed for bipolar disorder. Finding the right medication and 
the right dose for you will require monitoring and discussion with 
your doctor.
Bipolar disorder symptoms tend to return if the disorder is not 
treated. Most people who are untreated will experience another 
episode within a couple of years. Medications not only treat symp-
toms but also prevent their return. People are much more likely 
to stay well if they remain on medications. Recommendations for 
maintenance, or longer-term, treatment depend on the type of ill-
ness. For some people, who have a mild single episode that is not 
very impairing, staying on medications for one or two years may 
work. For most other people, longer-term treatment is recommend-
ed. In many cases, treatment may be indefinite. Bipolar disorder is 
potentially a chronic medical condition. 
Sometimes, people with bipolar disorder may feel well for a long 
time. When this happens, it is possible that the illness has entered 
into a quiet period. Or it may mean that the medication is success-
fully preventing symptoms. In either situation, it is important to 
keep taking medication. If a person ends the treatment, there is 
an 80 per cent risk of relapse within two years. Relapse may occur 
even after many years of stability.
Some people worry about becoming addicted to medications, or 
experiencing a change in personality. The main treatments for 

16
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
bipolar disorder are mood stabilizers, antidepressants and anti-
psychotics. These medications are not addictive and there is no 
evidence that they change personality. However, some anti-anxiety 
drugs carry a risk of addiction if taken regularly for more than a 
few weeks.
Some of the medications used to treat bipolar disorder may have 
side-effects. Many of these side-effects lessen with time, and others 
can be relieved with help from a doctor. The doctor will monitor 
side-effects and the medication dose, and will sometimes make 
other checks. With these checks in place, the risk for long-term 
physical complications from the medications is low. The risks of 
living with untreated bipolar disorder are much greater.
Medications for bipolar disorder fall into two broad categories—
mood stabilizers and adjunct medications. Adjunct medications 
are other medications that can be used to treat specific symptoms, 
such as depression, poor sleep, anxiety and psychotic symptoms. 
Adjunct medications include antidepressants, anxiolytics (anti-
anxiety medications), and antipsychotics (formerly called neuro-
leptics). These medications are often only used for the short term, 
until the mood stabilizers take their full effect. However, they can 
also be used in combination with mood stabilizers as longer-term 
treatments for bipolar disorder. 
People with bipolar disorder often require more than one medica-
tion. The treatment of other chronic medical conditions such as 
diabetes or epilepsy often requires a combination of medications.
Mood stabilizers
Mood stabilizers are medicines that help reduce mood swings. 
They also help prevent manic and depressive episodes. The oldest 
and most studied of the mood stabilizers is lithium, a naturally 
occurring element in the same chemical family as sodium. Many 

17
drugs that were first developed as anticonvulsants to treat epilepsy 
also act as mood stabilizers. These include carbamazepine (Tegretol), 
divalproex (Epival) and lamotrigine (Lamictal). Gabapentin (Neu-
rontin) and topiramate (Topamax) are also anticonvulsants that 
may act as mood stabilizers, although they are usually only given 
in addition to other medications.
Some people may be prescribed more than one type of mood stabi-
lizer to take in combination.
How mood stabilizers work is not fully understood; however, it is 
thought that the drugs work in different ways to bring stability and 
calm to areas of the brain that have become overstimulated and 
overactive, or to prevent this state from developing.
The side-effects of mood stabilizers vary depending on the type 
of medication. With some medications, side-effects are kept to a 
minimum through regular monitoring of the level of the drug in 
the blood. Some people experience no side-effects. Others may find 
the side-effects distressing. Side-effects usually lessen as treatment 
continues. If side-effects are not mild and tolerable, let your doctor 
know as soon as possible.
lithium
Lithium (Carbolith, Duralith, Lithane, Lithium Carbonate, Lithium 
Citrate) is found in nature in some mineral waters and is also pres-
ent in small amounts in the human body. Lithium is used to treat 
mania and to prevent further episodes of mania and depression. 
There is increasing research evidence that lithium protects brain 
cells from the inflammation that occurs in the brains of people 
with bipolar disorder. 
Common side-effects of lithium include increased thirst and urina-
tion, nausea, weight gain and a fine trembling of the hands. Less 
Treatments for bipolar disorder

18
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
common side-effects can include tiredness, vomiting and diarrhea, 
blurred vision, impaired memory, difficulty concentrating, skin 
changes (e.g., dry skin, acne) and slight muscle weakness. These 
effects are generally mild and fade as treatment continues. If, how-
ever, any of these effects are severe, they should be reported to your 
doctor immediately. Thyroid and kidney function can be affected 
by lithium in some people, and must be monitored regularly by 
your doctor.
divalproex, valproic acid or valproate
The differing names for this anticonvulsant medication reflect the 
various ways it is formulated. Divalproex (and its various forms) is 
used when people have frequent mood swings or when they don’t 
respond to lithium. Brand names include Depakene and Epival.
Common side-effects of divalproex include drowsiness, dizziness, 
nausea and blurred vision. Less common side-effects are vomiting 
or mild cramps, muscle tremor, mild hair loss, weight gain, bruis-
ing or bleeding, liver problems and, for women, changes in the 
menstrual cycle.
carbamazepine
Carbamazepine (Tegretol) is another anticonvulsant. It is used for 
mania and mixed states that do not respond to lithium or when the 
person is irritable or aggressive.
Common side-effects of carbamazepine include dizziness, drowsi-
ness, blurred vision, confusion, muscle tremor, nausea, vomiting 
or mild cramps, increased sensitivity to sun, skin sensitivity and 
rashes and poor co-ordination.
A rare but dangerous side-effect of carbamazepine is reduced blood 
cell counts. People who take this drug should have their blood 
monitored regularly for this effect. Soreness of the mouth, gums  

19
or throat, mouth ulcers or sores, and fever or flu-like symptoms can 
be a sign of this effect and should be reported immediately to your 
doctor. If carbamazepine is the cause of these symptoms, they will 
go away when the medication is stopped.
Oxcarbazepine (Trileptal), a closely related drug, may have fewer 
side-effects and drug interactions than carbamazepine, but is not 
as well studied for bipolar disorder.
lamotrigine
Lamotrigine may be the most effective mood stabilizer for depression 
in bipolar disorder, but is not as helpful for mania.
The starting dose of lamotrigine should be very low and increased 
very slowly over four weeks or more. This approach decreases the 
risk of a severe rash—a potentially dangerous side-effect of this drug.
Common side-effects of lamotrigine include fever, dizziness, drowsi-
ness, blurred vision, nausea, vomiting or mild cramps, headache 
and skin rash. Although it is rare, a severe skin rash can occur with 
lamotrigine. Any rashes that begin in the first few weeks of treatment 
should be reported to your doctor. 
Antidepressant medications
Antidepressants are medications that were originally found to be 
useful in treating depression, and more recently have often been 
found helpful to treat anxiety disorders. 
Antidepressants are thought to work primarily by affecting the con-
centration of chemicals called neurotransmitters in the brain. Key 
neurotransmitters that are affected include serotonin, norepineph-
rine, and dopamine. While antidepressants can be used in bipolar 
disorder during depression episodes, they must be used with caution 
Treatments for bipolar disorder

20
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
since they can also cause a switch into mania and may precipitate a 
cycle of frequent mood episodes (rapid cycling).
There are several classes of antidepressants; within each class there 
are many individual medications. The different types of antidepres-
sants are listed below in the order in which they are most commonly 
prescribed.
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (ssris)
This group of drugs includes fluoxetine (Prozac), paroxetine (Paxil), 
fluvoxamine (Luvox), citalopram (Celexa), escitalopram (Cipralex) 
and sertraline (Zoloft). ssris are usually the first choice for treat-
ment of depression and anxiety problems. 
serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (snris)
This class of medications includes venlafaxine (Effexor), duloxetine 
(Cymbalta) and desvenlafaxine (Pristiq).
norepinephrine and dopamine reuptake inhibitors (ndris)
The medication available in this class is bupropion (Wellbutrin, 
Zyban). When used to treat depression, it is often given for its 
energizing effects, in combination with other antidepressants. 
noradrenergic and specific serotonergic antidepressants 
(nassas)
Mirtazapine (Remeron), the medication available in this class, is the 
most sedating antidepressant. 
cyclics
This older group includes amitriptyline (Elavil), maprotiline 
(Ludiomil), imipramine (Tofranil), desipramine (Norpramin), 
nortriptyline (Novo-Nortriptyline) and clomipramine (Anafranil). 

21
Because these drugs tend to have more side-effects than the newer 
drugs, they are not often a first choice for treatment. 
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (maois)
maois, such as phenelzine (Nardil) and tranylcypromine (Parnate), 
were the first class of antidepressants. maois are effective, but they 
are not often used because people who take them must follow a 
special diet. A newer maoi, moclobemide (Manerix), can be used 
without dietary restrictions; however, it may not be as effective as 
other maois.
anti-anxiety medications
Anxiety is common in bipolar disorder. Sleep disturbance is also 
very frequent during an acute episode. Benzodiazepines, a family of 
medications with mild sedating ability, are often prescribed. Many 
types of benzodiazepines are available in Canada. All benzodiaz-
epines work the same way; however, the intensity and duration of 
their effects vary. Benzodiazepines may be used for short periods 
without causing addiction. 
The benzodiazepines most commonly used to treat anxiety are 
clonazepam (Rivotril), alprazolam (Xanax) and lorazepam (Ativan). 
Clonazepam is particularly useful for treating the excessive energy 
and reduced sleep of hypomania. 
Benzodiazepines used for the treatment of insomnia include loraz-
epam (Ativan), nitrazepam (Mogadon), oxazepam (Serax), temaze-
pam (Restoril), triazolam (Halcion) and flurazepam (Dalmane). 
Another drug used for insomnia is zopiclone (Imovane). This drug 
is similar to benzodiazepines and has similar side-effects. Zopiclone 
may have less abuse potential than some benzodiazepines; however, 
people can still become addicted to this drug.
Treatments for bipolar disorder

22
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
Antipsychotic medications
Antipsychotic medications are commonly used in bipolar disorder. 
These medications have powerful sedating effects, which help con-
trol mania, and can treat psychotic symptoms such as delusions of 
grandeur or persecution, and hallucinations. Antipsychotic medi-
cations are generally divided into two categories: first generation 
(typical) and second generation (atypical). Most people who take 
antipsychotics over a longer term are now prescribed the second-
generation drugs.
second-generation (atypical) antipsychotics
Medications available in this class include risperidone (Risperdal), 
quetiapine (Seroquel), olanzapine (Zyprexa), ziprasidone (Zeldox), 
paliperidone (Invega), aripiprazole (Abilify) and clozapine (Clozaril). 
Clozapine is exceptional in that it often works even when other 
medications have failed; however, because it requires monitoring 
of white blood cell counts, it is not the first choice for treatment. 
first-generation (typical) antipsychotics
These older medications include chlorpromazine (once marketed 
as Largactil), flupenthixol (Fluanxol), fluphenazine (Modecate), 
haloperidol (Haldol), loxapine (Loxapac), perphenazine (Trilafon), 
pimozide (Orap), trifluoperazine (Stelazine), thiothixene (Navane) 
and zuclopenthixol (Clopixol).
Newer medical treatments
Many of the newest medications used as mood stabilizers for bipolar 
disorder were first developed as anticonvulsants (epilepsy treatments). 
They include divalproex, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, lamotrigine, 
topiramate and gabapentin. There is variable evidence for the effec-
tiveness of these medications; divalproex and lamotrigine have been 
investigated more thoroughly than the others. 

23
Two other drugs, ketamine and scopolamine, administered intra-
venously are being investigated for their antidepressant effect in 
bipolar disorder.
It is helpful to ask your doctor about new and emerging treatments 
for bipolar disorder. In some university medical centres, it is also 
possible to participate in clinical trials of new treatments. 
ELECTROCONVULSIVE THERAPY
Electroconvulsive therapy (ect), also referred to as “shock therapy,” 
is perhaps the most controversial and misunderstood of psychiatric 
treatments, due in part to sensationalized and misleading depictions 
of the treatment in the popular media. In fact, ect is a highly effec-
tive and safe treatment for both the depressive and manic phases of 
bipolar disorder, and is sometimes used as a long-term maintenance 
treatment to prevent recurrence of illness after recovery.
ect does not resemble the shock therapy portrayed in films such 
as One Flew over the Cuckoo’s Nest. Now patients are given muscle 
relaxants and a general anesthetic before a mild electrical current 
is administered to one or both sides of the brain. There is minimal 
visible movement in the patient during the procedure. Usually the 
treatments are administered three times a week over three to four 
weeks, for a total of eight to 12 treatments. For longer-term main-
tenance treatment, the treatments may be spread out, for example, 
once a month, and continued for as long as the patient and doctor 
feel is appropriate. ect is usually given to hospitalized inpatients, 
but outpatients can receive ect as well.
Side-effects
Patients may have a headache or jaw pain on awakening after ect, 
usually requiring only a mild painkiller such as acetaminophen 
Treatments for bipolar disorder

24
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
(Tylenol). Some loss of recent memory or problems with concen-
tration usually occur during treatment (e.g., patients may not recall 
what they had for supper the night before the treatment), but these 
symptoms improve quickly after the course of ect is finished, over 
a few weeks. Some patients report mild memory problems persist-
ing much longer after ect treatment has been completed. 
Uses of ect in bipolar disorder
ect is the most effective and possibly the fastest-acting treatment 
for severe depression, and is particularly helpful for people who 
are highly agitated or suicidal, or those with psychotic or catatonic 
symptoms. Some people receive ect early in their episode of illness 
because of the urgency of their situation or their particular symp-
toms, while for other patients ect may be used only after various 
medications have failed. ect works well for severe mania as well. 
While ect is highly effective at ending an episode of depression or 
mania, the benefits may not last more than a few weeks or months 
following treatment. Therefore after a course of ect, patients usually 
start or continue treatment with mood stabilizers and/or other 
medication. Maintenance ect may be used when medications have 
not prevented a recurrence of the illness, or for patients who cannot 
tolerate the side-effects of medication. 
TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (tms) involves a series of short 
magnetic pulses to the brain to stimulate nerve cells. tms is being 
tested, but its effectiveness has not yet been proven. tms is being 
investigated as an alternative treatment to ect, but its effectiveness 
is not yet proven. Unlike ect, the treatment is carried out without 
the need for an anesthetic or muscle relaxant. 

25
COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE TREATMENTS
Some people with bipolar disorder seek non-conventional treatments, 
often as an adjunct to complement conventional treatments rather 
than as an alternative. Examples of complementary treatments include 
herbal medicines, acupuncture, homeopathy, naturopathy, medita-
tion, yoga and Ayurveda. A number of nutritional supplements and 
vitamins are also available. 
Many of these treatments have not been thoroughly tested. St. John’s 
wort has been shown to have some antidepressant effect for mild 
to moderate unipolar depression (depression without mania). In 
people with bipolar disorder, however, there is the possibility that it 
may cause a switch from depression to mania. St. John’s wort may 
also interact with a number of conventional medications. 
If you are interested in herbal remedies, it is important to talk to 
your doctor. It is helpful to have a doctor who is knowledgeable 
about complementary and alternative therapies, because these can 
interact with other medications you may be taking.
Omega-3 fatty acids (found in fish oils and some other foods) are 
anti-inflammatory, and diets high in omega-3 are linked with lower 
rates of depression. There is some evidence that omega-3 fatty acids 
may be helpful in bipolar depression. 
Some people find that practices such as yoga, tai chi and meditation 
can aid with the control of anxiety and depression. 
Physical activity
Physical activity or exercise has been shown to have antidepressant 
effect. Regular physical activity—even just walking for 30 minutes 
a day—has profound effects for physical and mental health. Exer-
Treatments for bipolar disorder

26
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
cise has also been shown to increase the size of the hippocampus, 
a part of the brain concerned with memory.
Psychosocial treatments
Psychosocial treatments include psychoeducation, psychotherapy, 
support groups and rehabilitation.
PSYCHOEDUCATION
Psychoeducation is a process through which people learn about 
bipolar disorder, and also have an opportunity to talk about their 
feelings related to living and coping with the disorder. For example, 
it is common for people learning about their illness to experience 
strong feelings of fear or denial. Often, talking openly about these 
feelings helps people to deal with them and better adhere to a treat-
ment plan that makes sense to them. Psychoeducation can occur 
in groups or in individual counselling with a doctor, social worker 
or other mental health care provider. When psychoeducation is 
offered in a group format it is usually time-limited (8 to 12 sessions) 
and each session focuses on a different aspect of managing bipolar 
disorder (for example, signs and symptoms, stress management 
and problem solving).
Psychoeducation also helps family members or partners under-
stand what the affected person is going through. They learn about 
the symptoms of bipolar disorder, its treatment, what they can do 
to be helpful, and the limitations to the help that they can offer. 
The family can meet with the treating doctor, or attend a family 
support and education group. 

27
Finally, psychoeducation helps people with bipolar disorder and 
their families to deal with their concerns about the stigma of mental 
illness. Although public education in recent years has raised aware-
ness, there are still many people who do not understand mental 
illness, and feel uncomfortable when it is discussed. It is important 
that people with bipolar disorder, along with their families, have a 
safe place to discuss this issue and decide what information they 
wish to share outside of the family.
PSYCHOTHERAPY
Psychotherapy is a general term used to describe a form of treat-
ment that is based on talking work done with a therapist. The 
aim is to relieve distress by discussing and expressing feelings, to 
help change attitudes, behaviour and habits that may be unhelpful, 
and to promote more constructive and adaptive ways of coping. 
Successful psychotherapy depends on a supportive, comfortable 
relationship with a trusted therapist. Psychiatrists, social workers, 
psychologists and other mental health providers are trained in 
various models of psychotherapy and work in hospitals, clinics 
and private practice.
There are many different models of psychotherapy. They fall into two 
general categories: short-term and long-term. Short-term therapies 
are structured and focus on current, rather than childhood, issues. 
On average, the treatment lasts for between 10 and 20 sessions. In 
short-term therapies, the therapist takes an active role in guiding the 
discussions. Long-term therapy is less structured, and can last for a 
year or more. The person has the opportunity to talk about a variety 
of concerns related to both past and present-day issues. In this model, 
the therapist is less directive and gives minimal advice, guiding the 
client instead toward his or her own answers. Psychotherapy is a 
very helpful treatment. For bipolar disorder, though, it only works as 
Treatments for bipolar disorder

28
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
an add-on to medications, not as a substitute. Every patient should 
get some supportive therapy that involves not only managing medi-
cation, but also dealing with the various problems that a person with 
bipolar disorder may experience. Practical suggestions and emotional 
support are the main features of supportive therapy. 
Cognitive-behavioural therapy 
Cognitive-behavioural therapy (cbt) is an example of a short-term 
structured psychotherapy that has worked well for many other dis-
orders. It is based on the idea that deeply held beliefs or thoughts 
influence how we look at ourselves and the world, and have a strong 
influence on our mood and behaviour. For instance, if we are de-
pressed and think no treatment will help, then we might not bother 
to seek treatment. This almost guarantees that we will feel worse. 
Cognitive therapy attempts to identify and change such thoughts 
and to improve mood and functioning. It is now being tested in 
bipolar disorder. The early results are promising, both in prevent-
ing future episodes and in treating depression.
Anxiety is common in bipolar disorder, and cognitive-behavioural 
therapy may be very helpful for more severe anxiety problems, 
such as panic attacks. It may in fact be needed, because the antide-
pressants that are also sometimes used to treat anxiety disorders 
may provoke manic episodes.
Insight-oriented or psychodynamic psychotherapy 
Insight-oriented or psychodynamic psychotherapy is an example of 
a long-term, unstructured psychotherapy. This therapy reduces dis-
tress by helping a person gain insight into the underlying motives 
of his or her overall behaviour. While this is not a specific treatment 
for bipolar disorder, it can be very helpful because increased self-
knowledge and awareness leads to more effective management of 
the illness. 

29
Group therapy 
Historically, group therapy has been used successfully to provide 
elements of support and psychoeducation. Cognitive therapy may 
also be provided in a group. However, group cognitive therapy has 
not yet been tested for people with bipolar disorder. 
Family and couple therapy 
Family and couple therapy can help address problems that may have 
existed before the illness and have become highlighted, or to deal 
with issues that have arisen as a result of the illness. The timing, 
however, is very important. During an acute episode, the family or 
spouse should be given only support and education. Formal family 
or marital therapy should wait until the person is more stable.
PEER SUPPORT GROUPS
Peer support groups can be very important to treatment. A peer 
support group is a group of people who all have bipolar disorder. 
These people can accept and understand one another, and can share 
their struggles in a safe, supportive environment. Group members 
usually develop a strong bond among themselves. People who have 
recently been diagnosed with bipolar disorder can benefit from the 
experiences of others. These groups are usually organized through 
the local chapters of the Mood Disorders Association (see page 66 
for more information). Although these groups are often called self-
help, peer support actually offers a type of help called mutual aid.
Hospitalization
During severe episodes of depression or mania, some people with 
bipolar disorder may need to be hospitalized. Hospitalization is 
needed if the illness is out of control and is putting a person at risk 
Treatments for bipolar disorder

30
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
of serious consequences—for example, through aggressive behav-
iour, risk-taking, failing to look after his or her own basic needs, or 
suicidal tendencies. 
VOLUNTARY VERSUS INVOLUNTARY ADMISSIONS 
Patients are usually admitted to hospital voluntarily. This means 
that they:
•	agreed to enter the hospital
•	are free to leave hospital at any time. 
However, in most places, the law also allows any doctor to admit 
a person to hospital involuntarily. This means the person may not 
agree that he or she needs help, and does not want to be in the 
hospital. This can happen if the doctor believes there is a serious 
risk that: 
•	the person will physically harm himself or herself 
•	the person will physically harm someone else.
If no doctor has seen the person, families also have the option of 
asking a justice of the peace to order a psychiatric assessment, and 
must provide convincing evidence that the person’s illness represents 
a danger to himself or herself, or to others. 
Laws protect the rights of people who are admitted involuntarily. 
For instance, a rights advisor will visit. The rights advisor will en-
sure that the person has the chance to appeal the involuntary status 
before an independent board of lawyers, doctors and laypeople.
The police are sometimes needed to help to get a person to hos-
pital. Family members may agonize over whether to involve the 

31
police. They often feel very guilty about calling the police, even if 
the police are needed to protect the person’s life. Remember, when 
people threaten suicide, they are usually pleading for help. They 
are taken seriously. Suicidal thinking is often a temporary feeling. 
When a person feels suicidal, he or she needs to be kept safe.
INPATIENT TREATMENT 
A typical hospital stay may be anywhere between a few days and 
several weeks. Usually patients are expected (or required, if they 
are involuntary) to remain on the psychiatric unit for the first few 
days of their stay. As they recover they may be granted increasing 
privileges to visit other parts of the hospital or to walk outside. Later 
they will be given passes to go home overnight or for the weekend. 
Patients participate in a variety of group educational and therapeutic  
programs, as well as individual sessions with medical, nursing and 
other professional staff. Medications may be changed or doses ad-
justed, and families may be interviewed by medical or social work 
or other staff. 
Discharge planning begins immediately following admission to 
hospital. Patients should expect to leave hospital as soon as rea-
sonable follow-up arrangements are in place and their symptoms 
have improved enough to ensure they are able to function safely 
and care for themselves at home. Staying in hospital after symp-
toms have improved may not benefit the person. It may in fact 
cause difficulties by reducing the person’s connection to family 
and social supports, and possibly undermining his or her inde-
pendent living skills.
Treatments for bipolar disorder

6 Recovery and relapse  
prevention
The goal in treating bipolar disorder is to help people get well again. 
This includes: 
•	treating symptoms until they no longer cause distress or problems
•	improving work and social functioning
•	reducing the risk of relapse. 
The process of recovery
Some people may recover quickly from a manic, hypomanic, mixed 
or depressive episode. For many others, recovery is more gradual. 
Often, it takes a few months for a person’s functioning to return to 
familiar levels, even if symptoms of the most recent episode have 
ended completely. 
The time needed to recover often frustrates people with bipolar 
disorder. This is especially true for people who expect a lot of them-
selves, who may feel demoralized by the delay. As a result, people 
sometimes rush back into a full or even increased range of activities. 
They may be trying to convince themselves and others that they are 
fully recovered. But this “flight into health” often overwhelms and 

33
Recovery and relapse prevention
exhausts them. Just as you would increase activities gradually if you 
were recovering from a broken leg, a gradual increase in activities 
after a bipolar episode allows you to slowly take on responsibilities 
and build self-confidence. 
Remember that recovery is a process, not a single event. After a 
bipolar episode, people often feel fragile, vulnerable and at risk of 
more episodes. These feelings are a normal part of the recovery phase. 
It takes some time before a person’s confidence and performance 
return to normal. At first, you should ease yourself into familiar 
activities and have modest expectations. Predict that when you 
return to activities such as socializing and going to school or work, 
you will probably feel anxious. Allow yourself to make mistakes. 
A social worker, occupational therapist or nurse can help plan a 
strategy for recovery that might include volunteer activities, leisure 
interests, school courses, and part-time or eventually full-time work.
Preventing relapse and promoting 
wellness
At this time there is no cure for bipolar disorder, and people with the 
disorder are at risk of further episodes. It is important to use periods of 
wellness as an opportunity to actively prevent relapse. Bipolar disorder, 
like illnesses such as diabetes, requires you to pay attention to how 
you are feeling, so you can catch early warnings of a possible relapse 
and possibly prevent a full episode.
Many people with bipolar disorder can benefit from counselling, psy-
chotherapy or meeting with an occupational therapist, social worker 
or nurse. Using such resources can help you find coping strategies  
to reduce symptoms, cope effectively with day-to-day stress and lower 

34
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
the risk of recurrence. Health care providers should recommend 
treatment tailored to your particular situation.
The following tips may help you prevent relapse and have a healthy 
lifestyle. 
1.	Become an expert on your illness. Read as much as you can about 
bipolar disorder and its treatment; if there is something you do 
not understand, ask your mental health care providers. 
2.	Live healthily. Do not use alcohol or other drugs, because they 
increase your risk of relapse. Eat a healthy diet, and exercise regu-
larly (it can have a positive effect on mood).  
 
If you are struggling with falling asleep or staying asleep, it is 
important for you to develop good sleep routines. Repeating these 
routines each night can help restore better sleep patterns. Try to 
go to bed at the same time each night. Avoid stimulating activi-
ties close to bedtime; plan on paying bills, completing work or 
having important discussions earlier in the day. Many people find 
that relaxation exercises, easy reading or a warm, non-caffeinated 
beverage just before retiring are ways to promote a relaxed state of 
mind. Expect that it will take you some time to fall asleep, and try 
not to anticipate sleep problems, as this will add to your anxiety. 
For some people, a sleep medication provides relief and allows 
them the much-needed rest they have been deprived of.
3.	Continue to take medication until your doctor advises you oth-
erwise. Often, people begin to feel better and stop taking their 
medication. Relapse is more likely if medication is discontinued 
too soon. Recommendations for maintenance, or longer-term, 
treatment depend on the type of illness. For some people, who 
have a mild single episode that is not very impairing, staying 
on medications for one or two years may work. For most other 

35
people, longer-term treatment is recommended. In many cases, 
treatment may be indefinite.
4.	You can’t avoid stress, so find strategies to better cope with 
stress. Many people with bipolar disorder tend to use only one 
coping strategy. For example, they hide their worries and avoid 
dealing with problems. This may work in some cases, but not 
in others. Where possible, try different strategies. Deal with some 
problems as they happen. Avoiding them allows stress to build 
up. Be realistic about your stress-breaking point. Work toward 
recognizing what aspects of relationships in your life might be 
unhealthy and, if possible, try to avoid situations that may trigger 
relapse.
5.	Avoid isolating yourself and maintain social support. Some people 
with bipolar disorder tend to spend too much time alone. This can 
add to their feeling depressed, demoralized and sad. Strong social 
networks and social support can serve as a buffer against these 
feelings. Try to avoid spending too much time alone, and work 
toward maintaining contact with your social network. 
 
Whom you tell about your illness is a very personal choice. While 
the stigma of mental illness is much less than it once was, it 
remains a concern for many people. As a buffer against relapse, 
however, it is important to have at least one person you can rely 
on and you can confide in. Along with family and professional 
support, many people with bipolar disorder find that peer sup-
port groups are a valuable part of their social network.
6.	Try to develop a balanced life. It might seem easy at first to escape 
from your depression by focusing entirely on one area, such as 
work or a hobby. Eventually, however, this coping strategy may 
not work, and you will need to develop other aspects of your life. 
It is important to keep in contact with all the facets of your life, 
Recovery and relapse prevention

36
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
such as school, work or volunteer activities, family and friends, 
and hobbies. As you recover, investing energy in several areas will 
help you develop a more balanced and satisfying life, which will 
help you to avoid relapse.
7.	Monitor your symptoms closely. Many people with bipolar disor-
der have a consistent pattern of symptoms across episodes. For 
example, some people learn to recognize the early phase of an 
impending relapse through signs such as needing less sleep, be-
coming irritable, or feeling that they no longer need medication.  
Monitoring such signs closely and seeking medical attention can 
stop a full-blown episode developing. Often, a mood diary or mood 
charting app can help. Most healthy people experience a variety of 
feelings that change from day to day—not all shifts in your mood 
are due to bipolar disorder. (See also “Recognizing and responding 
to early warning signs and triggers,” on p. 39.)
8.	Identify family and friends as support. Insight is commonly lost 
early in an impending episode. It can be helpful if friends or fam-
ily can recognize typical bipolar symptoms; they can help you in 
seeking treatment if necessary.
Practical aspects of recovery
An episode of either depression or mania usually disrupts daily 
routines as well as work, school and home life. People may feel that 
life will never be the same. They may also feel unable to assume 
their previous responsibilities and involvements. These feelings 
are natural and understandable. Yet, once they are properly stabi-
lized on medication, most people with bipolar disorder can return 
to their previous responsibilities and activities. 

37
Planning appropriate goals and setting priorities are essential to 
making this transition successful. Each plan and set of priorities 
is individual. However, it is important to discuss your ideas and 
concerns with your psychiatrist. Taking on too many or too few 
responsibilities can have an impact on recovery. Sometimes, people 
are advised to discuss their plans with other care providers, such 
as an occupational therapist, social worker or psychologist. Family 
members may also need to know about your plans and concerns. 
Family can give important support and feedback as you resume 
responsibilities. The aim is to get the “just right” type of challenge. 
This is true whether people are returning to school or work, or tak-
ing on roles within their family and community.
SCHOOL
If you are planning to return to school, you should discuss this 
with your psychiatrist and/or other mental health care provider. 
Some people they need to resume studies on a part-time basis. 
Many people experience problems with concentration and memory. 
Look for ways to improve or adjust your study habits. Study for 
shorter periods. Avoid noisy or high-traffic areas, as people often 
find it hard to block out the surrounding sights and sounds.
Letting your teachers know about some of your difficulties may be 
helpful. Many schools and most colleges and universities have a 
“special needs” office that may also be helpful. A counsellor at this 
office will ask about the reason for your absence. This information 
will help the counsellors work with your teachers and instructors. 
A counsellor can suggest the best change to a course load and res-
ponsibilities. Sometimes it may be helpful to give permission to 
these counsellors to speak with your health care providers. 
Recovery and relapse prevention

38
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
WORK
Returning to work may involve similar challenges and careful 
planning. It is important to discuss your plans for work with your 
psychiatrist. You may also need to discuss your concerns and plans 
with an occupational therapist, who can give you additional advice 
and support.
It is best to resume your responsibilities gradually, by starting either 
part-time or with a smaller workload. Your health care provider may 
recommend specific job accommodations to your work responsibili-
ties and schedule that may also be helpful in this transition. Typical 
job accommodations include more frequent breaks, time off to attend 
medical appointments, and a change in non-essential job duties. 
Educating your employer and co-workers about some of the typical  
signs of mood changes may be helpful in some cases. However, 
some people prefer not to discuss their illness with their employer. 
This choice will not allow you to ask for accommodations, but it  
does not mean that you will be unsuccessful in your transition back  
to work. In this situation it is especially important to have support 
outside of work to discuss your problems and concerns. 
HOME AND COMMUNITY RESPONSIBILITIES
You may also need to resume home and community duties gradu-
ally, in order to find the “just right” challenge of responsibilities and 
involvements. Reviewing priorities and developing a plan to resume 
activities may also be necessary. Look at what you can do and have 
been doing, and plan accordingly. 
What you are currently able to do may not match what you were 
able to do in the past. Although this may be frustrating, set daily 
goals and monitor your accomplishments. Reflecting on and modi-

39
fying your expectations is often an important part of this process. In  
the early stages you may need to rely on family members to absorb 
some of the daily household and other responsibilities. As recovery 
continues, you can gradually resume your responsibilities.
Recognizing and responding to early 
warning signs and triggers
When you return to school, work, or home and community involve-
ment, it is important to learn to recognize and respond to any subtle 
changes in your mood. Focusing on ways to concentrate better and 
to work more efficiently may also help. You may also benefit from 
decreasing some of the external stresses in your environment.
DEPRESSION
Typical signs of starting to feel depressed are:
•	trouble concentrating and focusing or completing tasks
•	lower energy level and confidence
•	sensitivity about the comments of others 
•	increased worry 
•	doubting the worth of daily involvement in activities
•	trouble making fairly simple decisions
•	changes in sleep and appetite.
Recovery and relapse prevention

40
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
It is also important to learn to identify your personal triggers, and 
make plans to cope effectively when they arise. Triggers are external 
events or circumstances that can precede mood changes. Some 
examples are:
•	anniversary dates
•	financial problems
•	conflict with an important person
•	being in an abusive situation
•	physical illness, such as flu.
When you are depressed or are experiencing triggers, you may find 
it helps to:
•	recognize some of the symptoms, and speak to your doctor to see 
if your medications need to be adjusted or if other treatments may 
be needed
•	seek out family members, friends or co-workers to support you 
and realistically assess your impressions
•	focus on completing simpler, concrete tasks, and delay the harder 
and more challenging tasks if possible
•	delay making any important decisions
•	limit time in more public and/or socially demanding activities
•	structure your day to include more activities that you find rewarding
•	set goals to address these mood changes; for example, make sure you 
are involved in enjoyable activities with people who support you.
HYPOMANIA
Typical signs of starting to feel hypomanic are:
•	decreased need for sleep
•	higher energy level and confidence (often includes taking on 
many tasks)

41
•	trouble settling down to work
•	strong feelings or disagreements (more than usual)
•	making decisions impulsively (more than usual).
When hypomanic, you may find it helps to:
•	recognize some of the symptoms, and speak to your doctor to 
decide if your medications need to be adjusted or if other treat-
ments may be necessary
•	look for ways to make your physical environment less stimulating
•	consciously try to get enough sleep and to relax enough
•	look for ways to protect yourself against yourself, such as putting 
away credit cards and avoiding certain social circles
•	consider putting off major decisions and cancelling any critical 
meetings 
•	plan your day and keep to a limited schedule 
•	set goals to address these mood changes outside work; for exam-
ple, find how to work off your extra energy safely with hobbies, 
exercise, etc.
CONCENTRATION
Whether you are feeling depressed or hypomanic, you may have 
trouble concentrating. At these times, you should:
•	discuss your problems with your doctor
•	recognize that this will not last 
•	try harder to write out goals and make plans for yourself
•	set goals that have flexible time limits
•	make your environment less stimulating
•	try to become aware of what times you perform best during the day.
Recovery and relapse prevention

7 Help for partners and families
What happens when someone you 
love has bipolar disorder?
When a family member has a chronic illness, it affects your entire 
family. This is true of a physical illness, such as diabetes, or a mental 
illness, such as bipolar disorder. When your relative or partner has a 
mental illness, you must cope with extra stressors, such as stigma. 
Fearing prejudice, your family may try to deal with mental illness 
alone. Furthermore, bipolar disorder will affect your relative’s mood 
and behaviour. At times, your family member’s mood disorder can 
make him or her less able to manage the illness, and the person 
may become less able to work with you to solve problems. This may 
include changes in how the person can attend to their usual roles 
and responsibilities.
As a family member, you will likely find both the manic and de-
pressed phases of the illness very distressing. If your family mem-
ber has only mild mood swings, you may be able to get through 
them without too much trouble. But if your relative’s mood swings 
are severe, you will likely find them hard to handle.

43
Help for partners and families
Depression
Seeing a loved one struggle with depression can make people feel 
sad, concerned, frightened, helpless and anxious. You may experi-
ence guilt, anger and frustration. All depressive episodes are upset-
ting, but the first episode will probably be especially confusing. You 
may not understand what is happening and why the person is not 
getting better on his or her own. Without information about depres-
sion, you might assume that your relative is lazy, or give well-mean-
ing advice and become frustrated and annoyed when he or she does 
not act on it. If your relative talks about suicide, you will understand-
ably live with a great deal of worry.
HOW TO RELATE TO A PERSON WHO IS DEPRESSED
Family members often do not know how to talk to a person who is 
depressed. They may be afraid to ask too many questions and inad-
vertently upset their loved one. At the same time, they do not want 
the ill person to feel that they are not interested or are avoiding him 
or her.
Try to be as supportive, understanding and patient as possible. Just 
recognizing that depression is an illness can help your relative to 
feel less guilty about his or her impaired functioning.
TIPS FOR COMMUNICATING WITH A PERSON 
WHO IS DEPRESSED
1.	Speak in a calm quiet voice.
2.	Focus on one subject at a time. Your relative or friend may have 
trouble concentrating.

44
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
3.	If the person is quiet and withdrawn, break the ice with neutral, 
non-threatening statements, such as “It seems a bit warm in here.”
4.	Be patient and wait. It may take a while for your loved to respond. 
5.	Your ability to listen is a valuable resource to your relative. 
Depression causes people to talk a lot about how bad they feel, 
yet they may not be ready to discuss solutions to their problems. 
Listening and letting the person know, in a neutral manner, that 
you have heard what he or she has said is valuable and support-
ive. You do not have to offer immediate solutions.
6.	If the person is irritable, you probably need to slow down, adjust 
your expectations and use a very neutral approach. Neutral com-
ments about the weather, what you are making for dinner or other 
routine subjects are the safest way to develop a dialogue. Listen for 
opportunities to acknowledge or add to your relative’s responses. 
At these times, conversations about important decisions or issues 
are unlikely to be productive. You may need to plan to discuss 
important issues at a later date.
7.	Avoid quizzing people about what made them feel depressed. Do 
not blame them for the way they feel, or tell them to snap out of 
it. People who are moderately depressed may be able to hear your 
helpful suggestions, but be unable to act on your advice. Quizzing 
or blaming them will only reinforce their guilt, loneliness and iso-
lation. Often, people with depression cannot identify what made 
them depressed or what will be helpful.
8.	Pace yourself. If your relative is severely or more chronically 
depressed, it is normal for you to find his or her company very 
draining. Brief, frequent contacts are often the best way to relate 
to someone with severe depression. If your relative is hospitalized, 
family members might take turns in visiting.

45
Mania
How a person behaves during a manic episode stirs up intense 
feelings, especially family members. You may feel frustrated, 
annoyed, angry or even hatred. The strength of your feelings will 
depend on how severe the episode is. It is particularly frightening 
if, in a manic episode, the family member you know seems to 
be replaced by a stranger. For example, a reserved, responsible 
person can become loud and sexually free; a kind, gentle person 
can become bossy and cruel.
As well, people experiencing mania usually think that they are right 
and everyone else is wrong. This aspect of mania is challenging for 
relatives and others around the person. Your family member may 
take no responsibility for what he or she says or does. As a result, 
there may be times when you have to bail the person out. Moreover, 
your relative may be acutely sensitive to weaknesses in others and 
can behave in ways that embarrass them. A person with severe 
mania can easily “blow up,” and being with someone in this state 
has been compared to walking in a minefield—you never know 
when there will be an explosion. Hardest of all, when someone is 
experiencing mania, he or she may have no insight into the manic 
behaviour.
If your partner has a manic episode, you may find it particularly 
hard because you, more than anyone, may be the target of his or 
her anger. You may also become a “buffer” between the person and 
the community, as others demand that he or she be controlled. If 
your partner runs up large bills, you may be hounded by creditors. 
Some people experiencing severe mania have extramarital affairs, 
which they may flaunt. If this happens, you may feel humiliated 
and betrayed. 
Help for partners and families

46
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
Withdrawing from your partner and considering divorce may seem 
the only way out of an intolerable situation. But you should not 
make big decisions, such as whether or not to divorce, when the 
person is severely ill. The situation will probably change when he 
or she has recovered.
HOW TO RESPOND TO A PERSON EXPERIENCING 
MANIA
Early in a manic episode, a person may be overly happy, energetic 
and outgoing. Those around the person can easily be caught up in 
the high spirits. Stay realistic and do not get carried away by this 
high mood. A person experiencing mania feeds on attention and 
conflict. Try to discourage the person from becoming involved in 
stimulating situations, such as long talks and parties.
Only a small percentage of people with bipolar disorder experience 
severe mania. A person with severe mania may become hostile and 
suspicious, or may explode verbally and physically. Avoid arguing 
with someone in this state. The person will only become angrier 
and may even assault you.
Typically, in a manic episode, people may behave without being 
aware of or considering the dangers to themselves and others. They 
may take on risky business ventures, overspend, drive recklessly, 
etc. You may need to step in. The best way of preventing this kind 
of behaviour is to plan for it when your relative is well. During stable 
periods, discuss and set rules that may involve safeguards. For 
example, consider withholding credit cards, banking privileges and 
car keys. Hospitalization can save the life of a person experienc-
ing mania.

47
TIPS FOR COMMUNICATING WITH A PERSON  
EXPERIENCING MANIA
1.	Reduce stimulation. People with mania are easily overstimulated. 
You may need to have fewer people visit at the same time. Or you 
may need to reduce noise and activity in the house.
2.	Keep conversations brief.
3.	Deal only with immediate issues. Do not try to reason or argue.
4.	Discourage discussing feelings.
5.	Try not to be authoritative, but be firm, practical and realistic.
6.	Do not jump to the person’s demands.
7.	Do not get caught up with the person’s euphoria or unrealistic 
expectations.
8.	Do not try to convince the person that his or her plans are unreal-
istic. At the same time, take steps to ensure his or her safety (e.g., 
by removing car keys or credit cards).
Getting treatment for your family 
member
FOLLOWING THROUGH WITH TREATMENT
Some people are very relieved when they are finally diagnosed and 
receive treatment that stabilizes their moods. For others, however, it 
is a long and bumpy road to accepting that they have a disorder that 
Help for partners and families

48
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
must be managed over their lifespan. Some people must endure 
several manic or depressive episodes before they consistently accept 
help from doctors and therapists. Mild mania can be seductive 
because it often includes feeling happy, more confident, more 
energetic and more creative. The lure of these feelings may keep 
some people from taking their medication. 
As a family member, it can be very difficult to watch this process 
without trying repeatedly to convince your relative to “take your 
medication” or “go and talk to your doctor.” Repeated attempts to 
convince and coax can lead to heated arguments and power strug-
gles. If you are very close to the person with bipolar disorder, and 
yet you feel that he or she may not be open to your observation 
that something is wrong, it may be more effective to have another 
trusted person approach your relative.
SUICIDAL THOUGHTS
A person with moderate depression will probably agree to medical 
treatment without needing too much encouragement. However, a 
person who is severely depressed and suicidal may refuse treatment 
because he or she feels so hopeless and worthless. In this case, you 
or another trusted person should insist that the person see his or her 
doctor or go to the emergency department of a local hospital. 
Many people will agree to go to the hospital. If the person refuses, 
there are a number of options the family can take. For example, 
you can go to a justice of the peace to get an order allowing police 
to take the person to hospital for an assessment. If there is an im-
mediate risk of suicide, you should call 911. 
Involving the police is a painful and difficult decision, although it is 
sometimes necessary in order to get an ill person to hospital. Family 

49
members often feel overwhelmingly guilty about this decision. It is 
important to remember that when people threaten suicide, they are 
usually making a plea for help, which should be taken seriously. Sui-
cidal thinking is usually a temporary emotional state during which a 
person needs to be in a place of safety. 
MANIC EPISODES
You may see that your family member is developing hypomania 
(e.g., being more energetic than usual, sleeping less, talking a lot). 
If so, encourage the person to see a doctor at once to get medica-
tion that will help calm down and stabilize his or her mood. For 
some people, hypomania leads to mania. If they are treated when 
they are hypomanic, they may avoid a full-blown manic episode. 
Once your family member develops full mania, the person may  
be unable to see that he or she is ill, and so may refuse to see a 
doctor. Manic episodes can make a person behave dangerously, with 
potentially serious consequences. People experiencing mania are 
therefore best treated in hospital. 
YOUR FAMILY MEMBER IN HOSPITAL
Once in hospital, if your relative is quite ill and impaired, it is some-
times better for both the patient and the family if visits are frequent 
but short. People who are acutely ill do not benefit from long conver-
sations in which they can become overwhelmed as they ruminate, 
or repeatedly focus on their feelings of hopelessness and negativity. 
Frequent, brief contacts allow you to stay in touch with your relative, 
and reassure him or her that you remain supportive. 
For some people, being in hospital is very challenging because their 
movements may be restricted to ensure safety. They may wish to 
leave the hospital before the professional staff feel their mood and 
Help for partners and families

50
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
behaviour are stabilized. For family members, this is particularly 
difficult as they can foresee the problems at home if the person be-
comes acutely ill again and requires hospitalization. Some patients 
will respond to the concerns of friends and family and agree to stay 
longer in hospital. This is more easily accomplished if there are clear 
goals to be achieved during the admission. For example, it might 
be helpful to concretely state that the person must be stabilized on 
medication and connected with a day program or community thera-
pist before discharge.
Most jurisdictions in North America have mental health legisla-
tion that permits involuntary hospitalization of people only if they 
threaten to harm themselves or other people, or cannot care for 
themselves. Many ill people who would benefit from hospitaliza-
tion do not meet these criteria and therefore may refuse to enter 
the hospital, or leave the hospital against medical advice. Families 
usually have a very hard time living with a person with mania 
who refuses treatment and who cannot be legally hospitalized or 
kept in hospital. 
In these situations, try to negotiate with your relative when it might 
be best to leave the hospital. What must be accomplished during the 
admission for you to feel it is safe for the person to return home? 
Could these issues be discussed in a discharge planning meeting 
with your relative, the doctor and any other care providers who work 
with him or her? 
Sometimes, you can slow your relative down by saying that you need 
this meeting to take place before consenting to his or her returning 
home. Families often feel guilty at insisting on these conditions, 
because they worry that their loved one will feel rejected. However, the 
result of premature discharge and poor discharge planning is fre-
quently a relapse in the illness and a more complicated situation.

51
Care for partners and families
When someone has a serious illness, it is natural for family members 
to feel worried and stressed. In an effort to spend time comforting 
or helping their loved one, family members may give up their own 
activities. Unsure of how others may respond to their ill partner or 
relative, they may also avoid having friends visit their home. Over 
time, they may become isolated from their own network of friends, 
or find that most of their own routines and activities have been 
replaced by the demands of caring for their loved one. Often, they 
are well into this situation before they realize how emotionally and 
physically drained they have become. This stress can lead to sleep 
disturbances, exhaustion or chronic irritability.
It is important to recognize these signs of stress in yourself and look 
after your own physical and mental health. Recognizing your own 
limitations and making time for yourself are key elements in “self-
care.” Ensure that you have a good support system of reliable friends 
and relatives. Think about whom you want to share the details of the 
situation with. Mental illness is a difficult thing for some people to 
make sense of, so it is understandable if you want to be selective and 
choose only people who you know will be supportive. 
Families and partners need to get as much information as possible 
about bipolar disorder. Knowledge and understanding will improve 
your ability to help and support your loved one, deal with your 
own feelings, and explain the situation to extended family, friends 
and colleagues. Information is available from the treating doctor, 
social worker or other mental health care providers. In addition 
to this publication, there are numerous books written for people 
with bipolar disorder and their families. They are usually available 
through public libraries.
Help for partners and families

52
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
Consider getting professional support for yourself, and joining 
a peer-support group or family support program, which may be 
offered at a local hospital or community mental health clinic. Keep 
up your interests outside the family and apart from your ill relative. 
Acknowledge and accept that sometimes you will have negative 
feelings about the situation. These feelings are normal and should 
not be a source of guilt.
Being ready for a relapse or crisis
Families often avoid talking to their relative about relapses or crises. 
They fear that talking about a crisis will bring one on, or they simply 
do not want to upset their relative. However, the best way to handle 
a crisis is to know what to do before it happens. It is important to 
focus on maintaining wellness, but some planning for a possible 
crisis can create a sense of security for the ill person and the family.
When your family member is well, discuss what you will do if he 
or she should become ill again. Is it possible to visit your relative’s 
doctor together to discuss his or her condition and the possibility of 
a crisis? If your relative became ill, would you have permission to 
contact his or her doctor? Would you have consent to take the person 
to the hospital, and which hospital is preferred? If your loved one 
were acutely ill, would you be allowed to make decisions? Could you 
put the conditions of an agreement in writing to ensure that these 
instructions were followed? A prearranged plan and a good work-
ing relationship with your relative’s doctor can help to contain an 
emergency situation.

53
Tips for helping your family member 
and supporting recovery
1.	Learn as much as you can about bipolar disorder. Learning about 
the causes, signs and symptoms, and treatment of bipolar disor-
der will help you to understand and support your family member 
in his or her recovery. 
2.	Acknowledge and accept your own feelings. Having conflicting 
emotions is normal when a loved one is diagnosed with bipolar 
disorder. Knowing this can help you control these emotions when 
you want to support your relative in making steps toward recov-
ery. For example, you may feel sad that your family member has 
a mental illness, and angry at what has happened and its effect 
on you. You may fear what the future holds and worry about how 
you will cope. If you are a parent, you may feel that somehow you 
caused the bipolar disorder, even though doctors have told you 
otherwise. It is also normal to feel a deep sense of loss when your 
relative is behaving in troubling, unfamiliar ways. And you may 
feel burdened by the extra tasks you have to take on.
3.	Encourage your family member to follow the prescribed treat-
ment. If your relative is not showing improvement or is having 
uncomfortable side-effects, encourage him or her to speak to 
the doctor about the medication, or to get a second opinion. It is 
helpful if you can go with your relative to the doctor and share 
what you have observed.
4.	Learn the warning signs of suicide. These signs include your 
relative showing increasing despair, winding up his or her affairs 
and talking about “When I’m gone . . . .” Take any threats very 
seriously and get help immediately. Call 911 if the situation gets 
desperate. Recognize, and help your family member to see, that 
Help for partners and families

54
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
suicidal thinking is a symptom of the illness. Always stress how 
much you value the person’s life. 
5.	When your family member is well, plan how to try to avoid 
crises. Plan together how you will respond to periods of acute 
illness, including dealing with suicidal behaviour and prevent-
ing harmful results of manic behaviour, such as overspending 
or reckless driving.
6.	Remember your own needs. Try to:
•	take care of yourself
•	keep up your own support network
•	avoid isolating yourself
•	acknowledge, within your family, the stresses of coping with 
bipolar disorder
•	share the responsibility with others
•	stop bipolar disorder from taking over family life.
7.	Recognize that recovery from a manic or depressive episode is 
slow and gradual. Know that your family member needs to recover 
at his or her own pace. Try not to expect too much but avoid being 
overprotective. Remember that stabilizing mood is the first step 
towards a return to normal functioning. Try to do things with your 
relative rather than for him or her. That way, your relative will 
gradually regain self-confidence.
8.	View bipolar disorder as an illness, not a character flaw. Treat 
your relative normally once he or she has recovered. At the 
same time, watch for possible signs of recurrence. In a caring 
way, point out any early symptoms and suggest a talk with the 
person’s doctor.

55
9.	Learn, with your family member, to distinguish a good day from 
hypomania and a bad day from depression. Like everybody else, 
people with bipolar disorder have good and bad days that are not 
part of their illness.
Help for partners and families

8 Explaining bipolar disorder  
to children
Explaining bipolar disorder or other mental illness to children can 
be awkward and difficult. To protect their children, the parent with 
bipolar disorder and the well parent (if present) may choose to say 
nothing and try to continue with family routines as if nothing were 
wrong. While this may provide a short-term solution, over the long 
term it can leave children confused and worried about the changes 
in behaviour that they have inevitably noticed.
Children are sensitive and intuitive, and quickly notice when some-
one in the family has changed. If the atmosphere in the family sug-
gests that the subject should not be discussed, children will draw 
their own, often incorrect, conclusions. Young children, especially 
those of pre-school or elementary school age, often see the world as 
revolving around themselves. If something negative or unpleasant 
happens, they assume they did something to cause it. For example, 
if a child disobeys a parent and gets into trouble, and the next 
morning the parent is depressed, the child may assume that he or 
she caused the parent’s depression.
To explain mental illness and bipolar disorder to children, you 
provide them with them as much information as they are mature 
enough to understand. Toddlers and pre-school children are able 

57
Explaining bipolar disorder to children
to understand simple, short sentences, without much technical 
information. School-age children can process more information, 
but may be overwhelmed by details about medications and thera-
pies. Teenagers are generally able to manage most information, 
and often need to talk about their impressions and feelings. They 
may have questions about how open they should be about the situ-
ation, and concerns about the stigma of mental illness. Sharing 
information with them provides an opening for further discussion. 
It is helpful to cover three main areas:
1.	The parent or other family member behaves this way because he 
or she is sick. It is important to tell children that the family mem-
ber is ill with a sickness called bipolar disorder. Bipolar disorder 
makes people feel one of two ways. They might be very depressed, 
or sad, sometimes for no reason. They might cry a lot, sleep all day 
and have trouble eating or talking to people. At other times, they 
might become very loud and happy, although small things might 
irritate them and make them angry. 
2.	Reassure the child that he or she did not cause the family mem-
ber’s illness. Children need to be reassured that they did not cause 
their loved one’s changes in mood through something they did or 
did not do. This is a frequent assumption that children will feel 
guilty about. Bipolar disorder needs to be explained as an illness, 
just like having chicken pox or a bad cold.
3.	Reassure the child that the adults in the family and other people, 
such as doctors, are trying to help the person who has bipolar 
disorder. Looking after the person is an adult responsibility, and 
not something the child should worry about. Children need the 
well parent, or other trusted adults, to serve as a buffer against the 
effects of a parent’s symptoms of depression and mania. They may 
find it very helpful to talk about their feelings with someone who 

58
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
empathizes with how hard it is to see their mother, father or other 
relative suffering. Many children are frightened by the changes in 
their parent. They miss the time previously spent with this parent. 
Participation in activities outside the home is helpful because it 
exposes children to other healthy relationships. As the ill parent 
recovers, gradually resuming family activities can help restore the 
relationship between the children and the ill parent.
Both the ill and the well parent should talk with the children about 
explaining the illness to people outside the family. Support from 
friends is important for everyone; however, bipolar disorder can 
be difficult to explain, and some families are concerned about the 
stigma attached to mental illness. The level of openness you and 
your children are comfortable with is a very individual choice.
Some parents with bipolar disorder may not be able to tolerate the 
boisterous activities and noise that are part of children’s everyday 
play and routines. It may be necessary to take special measures to 
protect against events that could trigger irritability in the ill parent 
and cause him or her to be abrupt with the children. You may need 
to plan time for the children to play outside the home, or arrange for 
the ill parent to rest for part of the day in a quiet area of the house. 
Once recovered, it is helpful for the parent who was ill to explain his 
or her behaviour to the children. The recovered parent may need to 
plan some special times with the children, to re-establish the rela-
tionship and to reassure the children that he or she is again available 
and interested in them.
More information on talking to children about depression is avail-
able in the pamphlet When a Parent Has Bipolar Disorder . . . What 
Kids Want to Know, available from the Centre for Addiction and 
Mental Health. An online version is available at www.camh.ca. 

59
The camh children’s book Can I Catch It Like a Cold? Coping with 
a Parent’s Depression may also be helpful resource.
Explaining bipolar disorder to children

60
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
Glossary
Adjunct medication: Medicine that complements a main medication.
Agitation: A severe inner restlessness that is often accompanied by 
anxiety. Patients typically cannot sit still; they may pace and wring 
their hands.
Antidepressants: Medicines used to treat the symptoms of depres-
sion. Antidepressants may also be used to treat other mental health 
problems, such as panic disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Antipsychotics: Medications that quickly control mania and treat 
psychotic symptoms. Antipsychotics can also prevent new attacks 
of mania.
Anxiety: An emotional state characterized by excessive worry, appre-
hension or fear of impending actual or imagined danger, vulnerabil-
ity or uncertainty. In a more acute form it can include intense fear 
and discomfort, with symptoms such as a pounding heart, sweating, 
shortness of breath, nausea, dizziness and fear of losing control. 
Anxiety is common in bipolar disorder.
Anxiolytics: Anti-anxiety medicines, such as benzodiazepines.
Benzodiazepines: A group of anti-anxiety medications that share 
a similar chemical structure. Some common benzodiazepines are 
diazepam (Valium) and lorazepam (Ativan).
Bipolar disorder: Formerly known as manic-depressive illness; a 
disorder characterized by mood swings, which includes the occur-
rence of one or more manic or hypomanic episodes and usually 
one or more major depressive episodes.

61
Glossary
Bipolar-I disorder: A type of bipolar disorder in which people expe-
rience full manic or mixed episodes.
Bipolar-II disorder: A type of bipolar disorder in which people experi-
ence only hypomania and depression.
Catatonic symptoms: People who become catatonic have trouble 
with movement: they may experience extreme physical agitation 
or slowness and odd movements or postures. 
Cognitive-behavioural therapy (cbt): A time-limited psychotherapy 
that focuses on how thoughts influence mood and how some 
thought patterns contribute to depression. cbt is beginning to be 
tested in the treatment of bipolar disorder, with promising early 
results.
Comorbid disorder: A medical condition that often accompanies, 
or co-occurs with, another disorder; for example, alcohol or other 
drug abuse, panic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder or binge 
eating disorder can co-occur with bipolar disorder.
Complimentary medicines: For bipolar disorder, these include 
“natural remedies,” such as fish oil and inosital (a kind of sugar). 
Little research has been done on these products. 
Cycle: The time from the start of one episode until the start of  
the next.
Delusion: A false, fixed belief not shared by your culture, such as 
believing that your thoughts are being controlled by forces outside 
you. There are various types of delusions, such as paranoid (with 
feelings of suspicion) and grandiose (with feelings of excessive self-
importance).

62
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
Depression: An episode characterized by a loss of energy, feelings 
of worthlessness and loss of interest in things that usually bring 
pleasure (food, sex, work, friends and entertainment). People 
may think often about death or suicide. Depression is diagnosed 
when at least five of a group of symptoms have lasted for at least 
two weeks. 
Electroconvulsive therapy (ect): A treatment procedure for severe 
depression and severe mania. ect involves passing a controlled 
electric current between two metal discs applied on the surface of 
the scalp.
Episode: A period of illness. This can include depression, hypo-
mania, mania or a mixed state.
Group therapy: Therapy for a number of patients together. Group 
therapy has been used successfully to give patients support and 
psychoeducation. 
Hallucination: a false sensory experience, such as seeing, hearing, 
tasting, smelling or feeling something that does not really exist.
Hypersomnia: The condition of sleeping too much, especially dur-
ing the day. Hypersomnia can be a symptom of bipolar disorder.
Hypomania: A state characterized by a high mood and overactivity, 
but not as extreme as mania.
Insomnia: The condition of not being able to fall asleep, or of wak-
ing too soon or repeatedly. Insomnia can be a symptom of bipolar 
disorder.
Light therapy: Light therapy is a form of treatment involving ex-
posure to a specific type of light for 30 minutes to one hour daily, 

63
for several weeks. This light is usually provided by a special light 
box, and is useful for the treatment of seasonal depressions and 
occasionally for other types of depression.
Maintenance treatment: Treatment intended to prevent a new epi-
sode (including depression, mania, hypomania).
Mania: A state characterized by an unusually high mood, irritabil-
ity, overactivity, excessive talking, racing thoughts, inflated ideas of 
self, lack of insight, poor judgment, impulsiveness and financial 
extravagance.
Manic-depressive illness: See Bipolar disorder above.
Mixed episode: An episode in which people experience both manic 
and depressive symptoms. The symptoms either occur at the same 
time or alternate quickly.
Mood disorders: Disorders that have a disturbance in mood (typi-
cally depression or mania) as the predominant feature. The two 
main categories are unipolar depression and bipolar disorder.
Mood stabilizers: Medicines, such as lithium, that help reduce 
swings in abnormal moods. They can also help prevent fresh 
mood episodes. 
Neurotransmitters: Chemicals that carry signals between neurons 
(nerve cells) in the brain. Neurotransmitters include norepineph-
rine, serotonin, dopamine and acetylcholine. 
Psychoeducation: An educational process that allows people to better 
understand and manage mental health and/or substance use prob-
lems, whether their own or those of a family member or friend.
Glossary

64
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
Psychosis: A term that refers to disturbances that cause the person-
ality to disintegrate and the person to lose contact with reality. 
Psychotherapy: A general term used to describe a form of treatment 
based on talking with a therapist. Psychotherapy aims to relieve dis-
tress by allowing a person to discuss and express feelings. The goal 
is to help the person change attitudes, behaviour and habits, and 
develop better ways of coping.
Rapid cycling: Bipolar disorder is said to be rapid cycling if a person 
experiences more than four episodes a year. Only 20 per cent of 
people with bipolar disorder experience rapid cycling.
Relapse: Return of the symptoms of an illness after a person has 
seemingly responded to treatment, but before the symptoms have 
fully gone. 
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (tms): A brain stimulation 
treatment that involves a series of short magnetic pulses directed 
to the brain. 
Trigger: A situation that can cause either mania or depression in 
a person who has already had an episode of illness. Stress, sleep 
loss, steroids and street drugs are some of the triggers for bipolar 
disorder.
Unipolar depression: Another name for major depressive disorder.

65
Resources
SUGGESTED READING
Basco, M.R. (2005). The Bipolar Workbook: Tools for Controlling Your 
Mood Swings. New York: Guilford Press.
Burns, D. (1999). The Feeling Good Handbook (Rev. ed.). New York: 
Penguin.
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health. (2003). When a Parent 
Has Bipolar Disorder . . . What Kids Want to Know. Retrieved from 
knowledgex.camh.net/amhspecialists/resources_families/Docu-
ments/when_parent_bipolar.pdf
Copeland, M.E. (2001). The Depression Workbook: A Guide for Living 
with Depression and Manic Depression (2nd ed.). Oakland, CA: New 
Harbinger.
Fast, J.A. (2006). Take Charge of Bipolar Disorder: A 4-Step Plan for 
You and Your Loved Ones to Manage the Illness and Create Lasting 
Stability. New York: Warner Books.
Fuller Torrey, E. & Knable, M. (2005). Surviving Manic Depression: A 
Manual on Bipolar Disorder for Patients, Families and Providers. New 
York: Basic Books.
Greenberger, D. & Padesky, C. (1995). Mind over Mood. New York, 
Guilford Press.
Last, C.G. (2009). When Someone You Love Is Bipolar: Help and 
Support for You and Your Partner. New York: Guilford Press.

66
Bipolar disorder: An information guide
Kabat-Zinn, J. (1994). Wherever You Go, There You Are: Mindfulness 
Meditation in Everyday Life. New York: Hyperion Books.
Miklowitz, D.J. (2011). The Bipolar Survival Guide: What You and 
Your Family Need to Know (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Redfield Jamison, K. (1995). An Unquiet Mind. New York: Random 
House.
Redfield Jamison, K. (2004). Exuberance: The Passion for Life. New 
York: Knopf.
INTERNET RESOURCES
Bipolar Network News 
www.bipolarnews.org
Canadian Mental Health Association (cmha) 
www.cmha.ca
Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (canmat) 
www.canmat.org
Depression and Bipolar Support Alliance 
www.dbsalliance.org
Mood Disorders Association of Canada 
www.mooddisorderscanada.ca
Optimism (a mood charting app) 
www.findingoptimism.com
Organization for Bipolar Affective Disorder (obad) 
www.obad.ca

67
Other guides in this series
Addiction
Anxiety Disorders
Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy
Concurrent Substance Use and Mental Health Disorders
Couple Therapy
Depression
First Episode Psychosis
The Forensic Mental Health System in Ontario
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Schizophrenia
Women, Abuse and Trauma Therapy
Women and Psychosis
To order these and other camh publications,  
contact Sales and Distribution: 
Toll-free: 1 800 661-1111  
Toronto: 416 595-6059 
E-mail: publications@camh.ca 
Online store: http://store.camh.ca


 
3973f / 01-2014 / PM105
ISBN 978-1-77052-579-5
This publication may be available in other formats.  
For information about alternate formats or other  
camh publications, or to place an order, please contact  
Sales and Distribution:
Toll-free: 1 800 661-1111  
Toronto: 416 595-6059
E-mail: publications@camh.ca
Online store: http://store.camh.ca
Website: www.camh.ca
Disponible en français.
Bipolar disorder is a serious medical condition in which people 
have extreme mood swings that affect how they think, behave 
and function. It typically includes a high state (mania) and a low 
state (depression)—both of which can include many different 
symptoms—in addition to a well state.
This guide is for people living with bipolar disorder, their families 
and anyone else who wants to understand this disorder. The guide 
describes the clinical features and symptoms of bipolar disorder, 
what is thought to cause it, and how it can be managed and treated. 
It also includes ways family members can support people with 
bipolar disorder while also taking care of themselves, and tips on 
explaining the disorder to children.
