make it stick

*

The Science of Successful Learning

Peter C. Brown
Henry L. Roediger III
Mark A. McDaniel


M A K E  I T  ST ICK


make it stick
The Science of Successful Learning
Peter C. Brown
Henry L. Roediger III
Mark A. McDaniel
THE BELK NA P PRESS of H A RVA RD UNI V ERSIT Y PRESS
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, En gland
2014

Copyright © 2014 by Peter C. Brown, Henry L. Roediger III, 
Mark A. McDaniel
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging- in- Publication Data
Brown, Peter C.
Make it stick : the science of successful learning / Peter C. Brown, 
Henry L. Roediger, Mark A. McDaniel.
   pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978- 0- 674- 72901- 8
1. Learning— Research. 2. Cognition— Research. 3. Study skills. 
I. Title.
LB1060.B768 2014
370.15'23—dc23
2013038420

Memory is the mother of all wisdom.
Aeschylus
Prometheus Bound


Contents
Preface ix
1 
Learning Is Misunderstood 1
2 
To Learn, Retrieve 23
3 
Mix Up Your Practice 46
4 
Embrace Diffi culties 67
5 
Avoid Illusions of Knowing 102
6 
Get Beyond Learning Styles 131
7 
Increase Your Abilities 162
8 
Make It Stick 200
Notes 257
Suggested Reading 285
Ac know ledg ments 289
Index 295


ix
People generally are going about learn-
ing in the wrong ways. Empirical research into how we learn 
and remember shows that much of what we take for gospel 
about how to learn turns out to be largely wasted effort. Even 
college and medical students— whose main job is learning— 
rely on study techniques that are far from optimal. At the same 
time, this fi eld of research, which goes back 125 years but has 
been particularly fruitful in recent years, has yielded a body of 
insights that constitute a growing science of learning: highly 
effective, evidence- based strategies to replace less effective but 
widely accepted practices that are rooted in theory, lore, and 
intuition. But there’s a catch: the most effective learning strate-
gies are not intuitive.
Two of us, Henry Roediger and Mark McDaniel, are cog-
nitive scientists who have dedicated our careers to the study 
of learning and memory. Peter Brown is a storyteller. We have 
Preface

Preface ê x
teamed up to explain how learning and memory work, and 
we do this less by reciting the research than by telling stories 
of people who have found their way to mastery of complex 
knowledge and skills. Through these examples we illuminate 
the principles of learning that the research shows are highly 
effective. This book arose in part from a collaboration 
among eleven cognitive psychologists. In 2002, the James S. 
McDonnell Foundation of St. Louis, Missouri, in an effort 
to better bridge the gap between basic knowledge on learn-
ing in cognitive psychology and its application in education, 
awarded a research grant “Applying Cognitive Psychology 
to Enhance Educational Practice” to Roediger and McDaniel 
and nine others, with Roediger as the principal investigator. 
The team collaborated for ten years on research to translate 
cognitive science into educational science, and in many re-
spects this book is a direct result of that work. The research-
ers and many of their studies are cited in the book, the notes, 
and our acknowledgments. Roediger’s and McDaniel’s work 
is also supported by several other funders, and McDaniel is 
the co-director of Washington University’s Center for Inte-
grative Research in Learning and Memory.
Most books deal with topics serially— they cover one topic, 
move on to the next, and so on. We follow this strategy in the 
sense that each chapter addresses new topics, but we also ap-
ply two of the primary learning principles in the book: spaced 
repetition of key ideas, and the interleaving of different but 
related topics. If learners spread out their study of a topic, 
returning to it periodically over time, they remember it better. 
Similarly, if they interleave the study of different topics, they 
learn each better than if they had studied them one at a time in 
sequence. Thus we unabashedly cover key ideas more than 
once, repeating principles in different contexts across the book. 

Preface ê xi
The reader will remember them better and use them more ef-
fectively as a result.
This is a book about what people can do for themselves 
right now in order to learn better and remember longer. The 
responsibility for learning rests with every individual. Teach-
ers and coaches, too, can be more effective right now by help-
ing students understand these principles and by designing them 
into the learning experience. This is not a book about how 
education policy or the school system ought to be reformed. 
Clearly, though, there are policy implications. For example, 
college professors at the forefront of applying these strategies 
in the classroom have experimented with their potential for 
narrowing the achievement gap in the sciences, and the results 
of those studies are eye opening.
We write for students and teachers, of course, and for all 
readers for whom effective learning is a high priority: for train-
ers in business, industry, and the military; for leaders of profes-
sional associations offering in- service training to their mem-
bers; and for coaches. We also write for lifelong learners nearing 
middle age or older who want to hone their skills so as to stay 
in the game.
While much remains to be known about learning and its 
neural underpinnings, a large body of research has yielded 
principles and practical strategies that can be put to work im-
mediately, at no cost, and to great effect.


M A K E  I T  ST ICK


1
Early in his career as a pi lot, Matt 
Brown was fl ying a twin- engine Cessna northeast out of Har-
lingen, Texas, when he noticed a drop in oil pressure in his 
right engine. He was alone, fl ying through the night at eleven 
thousand feet, making a hotshot freight run to a plant in Ken-
tucky that had shut down its manufacturing line awaiting 
product parts for assembly.
He reduced altitude and kept an eye on the oil gauge, hop-
ing to fl y as far as a planned fuel stop in Louisiana, where he 
could ser vice the plane, but the pressure kept falling. Matt 
has been messing around with piston engines since he was 
old enough to hold a wrench, and he knew he had a problem. 
He ran a mental checklist, fi guring his options. If he let the oil 
pressure get too low he risked the engine’s seizing up. How 
much further could he fl y before shutting it down? What 
would happen when he did? He’d lose lift on the right side, 
1
Learning Is Misunderstood

Make It Stick ê 2
but could he stay aloft? He reviewed the tolerances he’d 
memorized for the Cessna 401. Loaded, the best you could do 
on one engine was slow your descent. But he had a light load, 
and he’d burned through most of his fuel. So he shut down 
the ailing right engine, feathered the prop to reduce drag, in-
creased power on the left, fl ew with opposite rudder, and 
limped another ten miles toward his intended stop. There, he 
made his approach in a wide left- hand turn, for the simple but 
critical reason that without power on his right side it was 
only from a left- hand turn that he still had the lift needed to 
level out for a touchdown.
While we don’t need to understand each of the actions Matt 
took, he certainly needed to, and his ability to work himself 
out of a jam illustrates what we mean in this book when we 
talk about learning: we mean acquiring knowledge and skills 
and having them readily available from memory so you can 
make sense of future problems and opportunities.
There are some immutable aspects of learning that we can 
probably all agree on:
First, to be useful, learning requires memory, so what  we’ve 
learned is still there later when we need it.
Second, we need to keep learning and remembering all our 
lives. We  can’t advance through middle school without some 
mastery of language arts, math, science, and social studies. 
Getting ahead at work takes mastery of job skills and diffi cult 
colleagues. In retirement, we pick up new interests. In our 
dotage, we move into simpler housing while  we’re still able 
to adapt. If you’re good at learning, you have an advantage in 
life.
Third, learning is an acquired skill, and the most effective 
strategies are often counterintuitive.

Learning Is Misunderstood ê 3
Claims We Make in This Book
You may not agree with the last point, but we hope to per-
suade you of it.  Here, more or less unadorned in list form, are 
some of the principal claims we make in support of our argu-
ment. We set them forth more fully in the chapters that follow.
Learning is deeper and more durable when it’s effortful. 
Learning that’s easy is like writing in sand,  here today and 
gone tomorrow.
We are poor judges of when we are learning well and when 
 we’re not. When the going is harder and slower and it  doesn’t 
feel productive, we are drawn to strategies that feel more 
fruitful, unaware that the gains from these strategies are often 
temporary.
Rereading text and massed practice of a skill or new knowl-
edge are by far the preferred study strategies of learners of all 
stripes, but they’re also among the least productive. By massed 
practice we mean the single- minded, rapid- fi re repetition of 
something you’re trying to burn into memory, the “practice- 
practice- practice” of conventional wisdom. Cramming for ex-
ams is an example. Rereading and massed practice give rise to 
feelings of fl uency that are taken to be signs of mastery, but for 
true mastery or durability these strategies are largely a waste 
of time.
Retrieval practice— recalling facts or concepts or events 
from memory— is a more effective learning strategy than re-
view by rereading. Flashcards are a simple example. Retrieval 
strengthens the memory and interrupts forgetting. A single, 
simple quiz after reading a text or hearing a lecture produces 
better learning and remembering than rereading the text or 
reviewing lecture notes. While the brain is not a muscle that 
gets stronger with exercise, the neural pathways that make 
up a body of learning do get stronger, when the memory is 

Make It Stick ê 4
retrieved and the learning is practiced. Periodic practice ar-
rests forgetting, strengthens retrieval routes, and is essential 
for hanging onto the knowledge you want to gain.
When you space out practice at a task and get a little rusty 
between sessions, or you interleave the practice of two or 
more subjects, retrieval is harder and feels less productive, but 
the effort produces longer lasting learning and enables more 
versatile application of it in later settings.
Trying to solve a problem before being taught the solution 
leads to better learning, even when errors are made in the 
attempt.
The pop u lar notion that you learn better when you receive 
instruction in a form consistent with your preferred learning 
style, for example as an auditory or visual learner, is not sup-
ported by the empirical research. People do have multiple 
forms of intelligence to bring to bear on learning, and you 
learn better when you “go wide,” drawing on all of your apti-
tudes and resourcefulness, than when you limit instruction or 
experience to the style you fi nd most amenable.
When you’re adept at extracting the underlying principles 
or “rules” that differentiate types of problems, you’re more 
successful at picking the right solutions in unfamiliar situations. 
This skill is better acquired through interleaved and varied 
practice than massed practice. For instance, interleaving prac-
tice at computing the volumes of different kinds of geometric 
solids makes you more skilled at picking the right solution 
when a later test presents a random solid. Interleaving the 
identifi cation of bird types or the works of oil paint ers im-
proves your ability both to learn the unifying attributes within 
a type and to differentiate between types, improving your 
skill at categorizing new specimens you encounter later.
 We’re all susceptible to illusions that can hijack our judg-
ment of what we know and can do. Testing helps calibrate 

Learning Is Misunderstood ê 5
our judgments of what  we’ve learned. A pi lot who is respond-
ing to a failure of hydraulic systems in a fl ight simulator dis-
covers quickly whether he’s on top of the corrective proce-
dures or not. In virtually all areas of learning, you build better 
mastery when you use testing as a tool to identify and bring 
up your areas of weakness.
All new learning requires a foundation of prior knowledge. 
You need to know how to land a twin engine plane on two 
engines before you can learn to land it on one. To learn trigo-
nometry, you need to remember your algebra and geometry. To 
learn cabinetmaking, you need to have mastered the proper-
ties of wood and composite materials, how to join boards, cut 
rabbets, rout edges, and miter corners.
In a cartoon by the Far Side cartoonist Gary Larson, a bug- 
eyed school kid asks his teacher, “Mr. Osborne, can I be ex-
cused? My brain is full!” If you’re just engaging in mechanical 
repetition, it’s true, you quickly hit the limit of what you can 
keep in mind. However, if you practice elaboration, there’s no 
known limit to how much you can learn. Elaboration is the 
pro cess of giving new material meaning by expressing it in 
your own words and connecting it with what you already 
know. The more you can explain about the way your new 
learning relates to your prior knowledge, the stronger your 
grasp of the new learning will be, and the more connections 
you create that will help you remember it later. Warm air can 
hold more moisture than cold air; to know that this is true in 
your own experience, you can think of the drip of water from 
the back of an air conditioner or the way a stifl ing summer 
day turns cooler out the back side of a sudden thunderstorm. 
Evaporation has a cooling effect: you know this because a 
humid day at your uncle’s in Atlanta feels hotter than a dry 
one at your cousin’s in Phoenix, where your sweat disap-
pears even before your skin feels damp. When you study the 

Make It Stick ê 6
principles of heat transfer, you understand conduction from 
warming your hands around a hot cup of cocoa; radiation 
from the way the sun pools in the den on a wintry day; con-
vection from the life- saving blast of A/C as your uncle squires 
you slowly through his favorite back alley haunts of Atlanta.
Putting new knowledge into a larger context helps learn-
ing. For example, the more of the unfolding story of history 
you know, the more of it you can learn. And the more ways 
you give that story meaning, say by connecting it to your un-
derstanding of human ambition and the untidiness of fate, the 
better the story stays with you. Likewise, if you’re trying to 
learn an abstraction, like the principle of angular momentum, 
it’s easier when you ground it in something concrete that you 
already know, like the way a fi gure skater’s rotation speeds up 
as she draws her arms to her chest.
People who learn to extract the key ideas from new mate-
rial and or ga nize them into a mental model and connect that 
model to prior knowledge show an advantage in learning com-
plex mastery. A mental model is a mental repre sen ta tion of 
some external reality.1 Think of a baseball batter waiting for 
a pitch. He has less than an instant to decipher whether it’s a 
curveball, a changeup, or something  else. How does he do it? 
There are a few subtle signals that help: the way the pitcher 
winds up, the way he throws, the spin of the ball’s seams. A 
great batter winnows out all the extraneous perceptual dis-
tractions, seeing only these variations in pitches, and through 
practice he forms distinct mental models based on a different 
set of cues for each kind of pitch. He connects these models to 
what he knows about batting stance, strike zone, and swing-
ing so as to stay on top of the ball. These he connects to men-
tal models of player positions: if he’s got guys on fi rst and 
second, maybe he’ll sacrifi ce to move the runners ahead. If 
he’s got men on fi rst and third and there is one out, he’s got to 

Learning Is Misunderstood ê 7
keep from hitting into a double play while still hitting to score 
the runner. His mental models of player positions connect to 
his models of the opposition (are they playing deep or shal-
low?) and to the signals fl ying around from the dugout to the 
base coaches to him. In a great at- bat, all these pieces come 
together seamlessly: the batter connects with the ball and 
drives it through a hole in the outfi eld, buying the time to get 
on fi rst and advance his men. Because he has culled out all but 
the most important elements for identifying and responding 
to each kind of pitch, constructed mental models out of that 
learning, and connected those models to his mastery of the 
other essential elements of this complex game, an expert player 
has a better chance of scoring runs than a less experienced 
one who cannot make sense of the vast and changeable infor-
mation he faces every time he steps up to the plate.
Many people believe that their intellectual ability is hard-
wired from birth, and that failure to meet a learning challenge 
is an indictment of their native ability. But every time you learn 
something new, you change the brain— the residue of your 
experiences is stored. It’s true that we start life with the gift of 
our genes, but it’s also true that we become capable through 
the learning and development of mental models that enable 
us to reason, solve, and create. In other words, the elements 
that shape your intellectual abilities lie to a surprising extent 
within your own control. Understanding that this is so en-
ables you to see failure as a badge of effort and a source of 
useful information— the need to dig deeper or to try a differ-
ent strategy. The need to understand that when learning is 
hard, you’re doing important work. To understand that striv-
ing and setbacks, as in any action video game or new BMX 
bike stunt, are essential if you are to surpass your current level 
of per for mance toward true expertise. Making mistakes and 
correcting them builds the bridges to advanced learning.

Make It Stick ê 8
Empirical Evidence versus Theory, 
Lore, and Intuition
Much of how we structure training and schooling is based on 
learning theories that have been handed down to us, and 
these are shaped by our own sense of what works, a sensibil-
ity drawn from our personal experiences as teachers, coaches, 
students, and mere humans at large on the earth. How we 
teach and study is largely a mix of theory, lore, and intuition. 
But over the last forty years and more, cognitive psychologists 
have been working to build a body of evidence to clarify what 
works and to discover the strategies that get results.
Cognitive psychology is the basic science of understanding 
how the mind works, conducting empirical research into how 
people perceive, remember, and think. Many others have their 
hands in the puzzle of learning as well. Developmental and 
educational psychologists are concerned with theories of 
 human development and how they can be used to shape the 
tools of education— such as testing regimes, instructional or-
ganizers (for example topic outlines and schematic illustra-
tions), and resources for special groups like those in remedial 
and gifted education. Neuroscientists, using new imaging tech-
niques and other tools, are advancing our understanding of 
brain mechanisms that underlie learning, but  we’re still a very 
long way from knowing what neuroscience will tell us about 
how to improve education.
How is one to know whose advice to take on how best to 
go about learning?
It’s wise to be skeptical. Advice is easy to fi nd, only a few 
mouse- clicks away. Yet not all advice is grounded in research— 
far from it. Nor does all that passes as research meet the stan-
dards of science, such as having appropriate control condi-
tions to assure that the results of an investigation are objective 

Learning Is Misunderstood ê 9
and generalizable. The best empirical studies are experimental 
in nature: the researcher develops a hypothesis and then tests 
it through a set of experiments that must meet rigorous crite-
ria for design and objectivity. In the chapters that follow, we 
have distilled the fi ndings of a large body of such studies that 
have stood up under review by the scientifi c community be-
fore being published in professional journals. We are collabo-
rators in some of these studies, but not the lion’s share. Where 
 we’re offering theory rather than scientifi cally validated re-
sults, we say so. To make our points we use, in addition to 
tested science, anecdotes from people like Matt Brown whose 
work requires mastery of complex knowledge and skills, sto-
ries that illustrate the underlying principles of how we learn 
and remember. Discussion of the research studies themselves 
is kept to a minimum, but you will fi nd many of them cited in 
the notes at the end of the book if you care to dig further.
People Misunderstand Learning
It turns out that much of what  we’ve been doing as teachers 
and students isn’t serving us well, but some comparatively 
simple changes could make a big difference. People commonly 
believe that if you expose yourself to something enough times— 
say, a textbook passage or a set of terms from an eighth grade 
biology class— you can burn it into memory. Not so. Many 
teachers believe that if they can make learning easier and faster, 
the learning will be better. Much research turns this belief on 
its head: when learning is harder, it’s stronger and lasts longer. 
It’s widely believed by teachers, trainers, and coaches that the 
most effective way to master a new skill is to give it dogged, 
single- minded focus, practicing over and over until you’ve got 
it down. Our faith in this runs deep, because most of us see 
fast gains during the learning phase of massed practice. What’s 

Make It Stick ê 10
apparent from the research is that gains achieved during 
massed practice are transitory and melt away quickly.
The fi nding that rereading textbooks is often labor in vain 
ought to send a chill up the spines of educators and learners, 
because it’s the number one study strategy of most people—
including more than 80 percent of college students in some 
surveys—and is central in what we tell ourselves to do during 
the hours we dedicate to learning. Rereading has three strikes 
against it. It is time consuming. It  doesn’t result in durable 
memory. And it often involves a kind of unwitting self- 
deception, as growing familiarity with the text comes to feel 
like mastery of the content. The hours immersed in rereading 
can seem like due diligence, but the amount of study time is 
no mea sure of mastery.2
You needn’t look far to fi nd training systems that lean 
heavily on the conviction that mere exposure leads to learn-
ing. Consider Matt Brown, the pi lot. When Matt was ready 
to advance from piston planes, he had a  whole new body of 
knowledge to master in order to get certifi ed for the business 
jet he was hired to pi lot. We asked him to describe this pro-
cess. His employer sent him to eigh teen days of training, ten 
hours a day, in what Matt called the “fi re hose” method of 
instruction. The fi rst seven days straight  were spent in the 
classroom being instructed in all the plane’s systems: electri-
cal, fuel, pneumatics, and so on, how these systems operated 
and interacted, and all their fail- safe tolerances like pressures, 
weights, temperatures, and speeds. Matt is required to have at 
his immediate command about eighty different “memory ac-
tion items”— actions to take without hesitation or thought in 
order to stabilize the plane the moment any one of a dozen or 
so unexpected events occur. It might be a sudden decompres-
sion, a thrust reverser coming unlocked in fl ight, an engine 
failure, an electrical fi re.

Learning Is Misunderstood ê 11
Matt and his fellow pi lots gazed for hours at mind- 
numbing PowerPoint illustrations of their airplane’s principal 
systems. Then something interesting happened.
“About the middle of day fi ve,” Matt said, “they fl ash a 
schematic of the fuel system on the screen, with its pressure 
sensors, shutoff valves, ejector pumps, bypass lines, and on 
and on, and you’re struggling to stay focused. Then this one 
instructor asks us, ‘Has anybody  here had the fuel fi lter by-
pass light go on in fl ight?’ This pi lot across the room raises his 
hand. So the instructor says, ‘Tell us what happened,’ and sud-
denly you’re thinking, Whoa, what if that was me?
“So, this guy was at 33,000 feet or something and he’s 
about to lose both engines because he got fuel without anti-
freeze in it and his fi lters are clogging with ice. You hear that 
story and, believe me, that schematic comes to life and sticks 
with you. Jet fuel can commonly have a little water in it, and 
when it gets cold at high altitude, the water will condense out, 
and it can freeze and block the line. So whenever you refuel, 
you make good and sure to look for a sign on the fuel truck 
saying the fuel has Prist in it, which is an antifreeze. And if you 
ever see that light go on in fl ight, you’re going to get yourself 
down to some warmer air in a hurry.”3 Learning is stronger 
when it matters, when the abstract is made concrete and 
personal.
Then the nature of Matt’s instruction shifted. The next 
eleven days  were spent in a mix of classroom and fl ight simu-
lator training.  Here, Matt described the kind of active en-
gagement that leads to durable learning, as the pi lots had to 
grapple with their aircraft to demonstrate mastery of stan-
dard operating procedures, respond to unexpected situations, 
and drill on the rhythm and physical memory of the move-
ments that are required in the cockpit for dealing with them. 
A fl ight simulator provides retrieval practice, and the practice 

Make It Stick ê 12
is spaced, interleaved, and varied and involves as far as pos-
sible the same mental pro cesses Matt will invoke when he’s at 
altitude. In a simulator, the abstract is made concrete and 
personal. A simulator is also a series of tests, in that it helps 
Matt and his instructors calibrate their judgment of where he 
needs to focus to bring up his mastery.
In some places, like Matt Brown’s fl ight simulator, teachers 
and trainers have found their way to highly effective learning 
techniques, yet in virtually any fi eld, these techniques tend to 
be the exception, and “fi re hose” lectures (or their equivalent) 
are too often the norm.
In fact, what students are advised to do is often plain wrong. 
For instance, study tips published on a website at George 
Mason University include this advice: “The key to learning 
something well is repetition; the more times you go over the 
material the better chance you have of storing it permanently.”4 
Another, from a Dartmouth College website, suggests: “If you 
intend to remember something, you probably will.”5 A pub-
lic ser vice piece that runs occasionally in the St. Louis Post- 
Dispatch offering study advice shows a kid with his nose 
buried in a book. “Concentrate,” the caption reads. “Focus on 
one thing and one thing only. Repeat, repeat, repeat! Repeat-
ing what you have to remember can help burn it into your 
memory.”6 Belief in the power of rereading, intentionality, and 
repetition is pervasive, but the truth is you usually  can’t em-
bed something in memory simply by repeating it over and 
over. This tactic might work when looking up a phone num-
ber and holding it in your mind while punching it into your 
phone, but it  doesn’t work for durable learning.
A simple example, reproduced on the Internet (search 
“penny memory test”), presents a dozen different images of a 

Learning Is Misunderstood ê 13
common penny, only one of which is correct. As many times 
as you’ve seen a penny, you’re hard pressed to say with confi -
dence which one it is. Similarly, a recent study asked faculty 
and students who worked in the Psychology Building at UCLA 
to identify the fi re extinguisher closest to their offi ce. Most 
failed the test. One professor, who had been at UCLA for 
twenty- fi ve years, left his safety class and decided to look for 
the fi re extinguisher closest to his offi ce. He discovered that it 
was actually right next to his offi ce door, just inches from the 
doorknob he turned every time he went into his offi ce. Thus, 
in this case, even years of repetitive exposure did not result in 
his learning where to grab the closest extinguisher if his waste-
basket caught fi re.7
Early Evidence
The fallacy in thinking that repetitive exposure builds mem-
ory has been well established through a series of investiga-
tions going back to the mid- 1960s, when the psychologist 
Endel Tulving at the University of Toronto began testing people 
on their ability to remember lists of common En glish nouns. In 
a fi rst phase of the experiment, the participants simply read a 
list of paired items six times (for example, a pair on the list 
might be “chair— 9”); they did not expect a memory test. The 
fi rst item in each pair was always a noun. After reading the 
listed pairs six times, participants  were then told that they 
would be getting a list of nouns that they would be asked to 
remember. For one group of people, the nouns  were the same 
ones they had just read six times in the prior reading phase; 
for another group, the nouns to be learned  were different from 
those they had previously read. Remarkably, Tulving found 
that the two groups’ learning of the nouns did not differ— the 
learning curves  were statistically indistinguishable. Intuition 

Make It Stick ê 14
would suggest otherwise, but prior exposure did not aid later 
recall. Mere repetition did not enhance learning. Subsequent 
studies by many researchers have pressed further into ques-
tions of whether repeated exposure or longer periods of hold-
ing an idea in mind contribute to later recall, and these studies 
have confi rmed and elaborated on the fi ndings that repetition 
by itself does not lead to good long- term memory.8
These results led researchers to investigate the benefi ts of 
rereading texts. In a 2008 article in Contemporary Educa-
tional Psychology, Washington University scientists reported 
on a series of studies they conducted at their own school and 
at the University of New Mexico to shed light on rereading as 
a strategy to improve understanding and memory of prose. 
Like most research, these studies stood on the shoulders of 
earlier work by others; some showed that when the same text 
is read multiple times the same inferences are made and the 
same connections between topics are formed, and others sug-
gested modest benefi ts from rereading. These benefi ts had been 
found in two different situations. In the fi rst, some students 
read and immediately reread study material, whereas other 
students read the material only once. Both groups took an im-
mediate test after reading, and the group who had read twice 
performed a bit better than the group who had read once. 
However, on a delayed test the benefi t of immediate rereading 
had worn off, and the rereaders performed at the same level as 
the one- time readers. In the other situation, students read the 
material the fi rst time and then waited some days before they 
reread it. This group, having done spaced readings of the text, 
performed better on the test than the group who did not re-
read the material.9
Subsequent experiments at Washington University, aimed 
at teasing apart some of the questions the earlier studies had 
raised, assessed the benefi ts of rereading among students of 

Learning Is Misunderstood ê 15
differing abilities, in a learning situation paralleling that faced 
by students in classes. A total of 148 students read fi ve differ-
ent passages taken from textbooks and Scientifi c American. 
The students  were at two different universities; some  were 
high- ability readers, and others  were low- ability; some stu-
dents read the material only once, and others read it twice in 
succession. Then all of them responded to questions to dem-
onstrate what they had learned and remembered.
In these experiments, multiple readings in close succession 
did not prove to be a potent study method for either group, 
at either school, in any of the conditions tested. In fact, the 
researchers found no rereading benefi t at all under these 
conditions.
What’s the conclusion? It makes sense to reread a text once 
if there’s been a meaningful lapse of time since the fi rst read-
ing, but doing multiple readings in close succession is a time- 
consuming study strategy that yields negligible benefi ts at the 
expense of much more effective strategies that take less time. 
Yet surveys of college students confi rm what professors have 
long known: highlighting, underlining, and sustained poring 
over notes and texts are the most- used study strategies, by far.10
Illusions of Knowing
If rereading is largely in effec tive, why do students favor it? 
One reason may be that they’re getting bad study advice. But 
there’s another, subtler way they’re pushed toward this method 
of review, the phenomenon mentioned earlier: rising familiar-
ity with a text and fl uency in reading it can create an illusion 
of mastery. As any professor will attest, students work hard to 
capture the precise wording of phrases they hear in class lec-
tures, laboring under the misapprehension that the essence of 
the subject lies in the syntax in which it’s described. Mastering 

Make It Stick ê 16
the lecture or the text is not the same as mastering the ideas 
behind them. However, repeated reading provides the illu-
sion of mastery of the underlying ideas. Don’t let yourself be 
fooled. The fact that you can repeat the phrases in a text or 
your lecture notes is no indication that you understand the 
signifi cance of the precepts they describe, their application, or 
how they relate to what you already know about the subject.
Too common is the experience of a college professor an-
swering a knock on her offi ce door only to fi nd a fi rst- year 
student in distress, asking to discuss his low grade on the fi rst 
test in introductory psychology. How is it possible? He at-
tended all the lectures and took diligent notes on them. He 
read the text and highlighted the critical passages.
How did he study for the test? she asks.
Well, he’d gone back and highlighted his notes, and then 
reviewed the highlighted notes and his highlighted text mate-
rial several times until he felt he was thoroughly familiar with 
all of it. How could it be that he had pulled a D on the exam?
Had he used the set of key concepts in the back of each 
chapter to test himself? Could he look at a concept like “con-
ditioned stimulus,” defi ne it, and use it in a paragraph? While 
he was reading, had he thought of converting the main points 
of the text into a series of questions and then later tried to 
answer them while he was studying? Had he at least re-
phrased the main ideas in his own words as he read? Had he 
tried to relate them to what he already knew? Had he looked 
for examples outside the text? The answer was no in every 
case.
He sees himself as the model student, diligent to a fault, 
but the truth is he  doesn’t know how to study effectively.
The illusion of mastery is an example of poor metacogni-
tion: what we know about what we know. Being accurate in 
your judgment of what you know and don’t know is critical 

Learning Is Misunderstood ê 17
for decision making. The problem was famously (and pro-
phetically) summed up by Secretary of State Donald Rums-
feld in a 2002 press briefi ng about US intelligence on Iraq’s 
possible possession of weapons of mass destruction: “There 
are known knowns; there are things we know that we know. 
There are known unknowns; that is to say, there are things 
that we now know we don’t know. But there are also un-
known unknowns—there are things we do not know we don’t 
know.”
The emphasis  here is ours. We make it to drive home the 
point that students who don’t quiz themselves (and most do 
not) tend to overestimate how well they have mastered class 
material. Why? When they hear a lecture or read a text that is 
a paragon of clarity, the ease with which they follow the argu-
ment gives them the feeling that they already know it and 
don’t need to study it. In other words, they tend not to know 
what they don’t know; when put to the test, they fi nd they 
cannot recall the critical ideas or apply them in a new context. 
Likewise, when they’ve reread their lecture notes and texts to 
the point of fl uency, their fl uency gives them the false sense 
that they’re in possession of the underlying content, princi-
ples, and implications that constitute real learning, confi dent 
that they can recall them at a moment’s notice. The upshot is 
that even the most diligent students are often hobbled by two 
liabilities: a failure to know the areas where their learning is 
weak— that is, where they need to do more work to bring up 
their knowledge— and a preference for study methods that 
create a false sense of mastery.11
Knowledge: Not Sufﬁ cient, but Necessary
Albert Einstein declared “creativity is more important than 
knowledge,” and the sentiment appears to be widely shared by 

Make It Stick ê 18
college students, if their choice in t-shirt proclamations is any 
indication. And why  wouldn’t they seize on the sentiment? It 
embodies an obvious and profound truth, for without cre-
ativity where would our scientifi c, social, or economic break-
throughs come from? Besides which, accumulating knowledge 
can feel like a grind, while creativity sounds like a lot more fun. 
But of course the dichotomy is false. You  wouldn’t want to see 
that t-shirt on your neurosurgeon or on the captain who’s fl y-
ing your plane across the Pacifi c. But the sentiment has gained 
some currency as a reaction to standardized testing, fearing 
that this kind of testing leads to an emphasis on memorization 
at the expense of high- level skills. Notwithstanding the pitfalls 
of standardized testing, what we really ought to ask is how to 
do better at building knowledge and creativity, for without 
knowledge you don’t have the foundation for the higher- level 
skills of analysis, synthesis, and creative problem solving. As 
the psychologist Robert Sternberg and two colleagues put it, 
“one cannot apply what one knows in a practical manner if 
one does not know anything to apply.”12
Mastery in any fi eld, from cooking to chess to brain sur-
gery, is a gradual accretion of knowledge, conceptual under-
standing, judgment, and skill. These are the fruits of variety in 
the practice of new skills, and of striving, refl ection, and men-
tal rehearsal. Memorizing facts is like stocking a construction 
site with the supplies to put up a  house. Building the  house 
requires not only knowledge of countless different fi ttings and 
materials but conceptual understanding, too, of aspects like 
the load- bearing properties of a header or roof truss system, 
or the principles of energy transfer and conservation that will 
keep the  house warm but the roof deck cold so the own er 
 doesn’t call six months later with ice dam problems. Mastery 
requires both the possession of ready knowledge and the con-
ceptual understanding of how to use it.

Learning Is Misunderstood ê 19
When Matt Brown had to decide whether or not to kill his 
right engine he was problem solving, and he needed to know 
from memory the procedures for fl ying with a dead engine 
and the tolerances of his plane in order to predict whether he 
would fall out of the air or be unable to straighten up for 
landing. The would- be neurosurgeon in her fi rst year of med 
school has to memorize the  whole ner vous system, the  whole 
skeletal system, the  whole muscular system, the humeral sys-
tem. If she  can’t, she’s not going to be a neurosurgeon. Her 
success will depend on diligence, of course, but also on fi nding 
study strategies that will enable her to learn the sheer volume 
of material required in the limited hours available.
Testing: Dipstick versus Learning Tool
There are few surer ways to raise the hackles of many stu-
dents and educators than talking about testing. The growing 
focus over recent years on standardized assessment, in par-
tic u lar, has turned testing into a lightning rod for frustration 
over how to achieve the country’s education goals. Online 
forums and news articles are besieged by readers who charge 
that emphasis on testing favors memorization at the expense 
of a larger grasp of context or creative ability; that testing cre-
ates extra stress for students and gives a false mea sure of abil-
ity; and so on. But if we stop thinking of testing as a dipstick 
to mea sure learning— if we think of it as practicing retrieval 
of learning from memory rather than “testing,” we open our-
selves to another possibility: the use of testing as a tool for 
learning.
One of the most striking research fi ndings is the power of 
active retrieval— testing—to strengthen memory, and that the 
more effortful the retrieval, the stronger the benefi t. Think 
fl ight simulator versus PowerPoint lecture. Think quiz versus 

Make It Stick ê 20
rereading. The act of retrieving learning from memory has 
two profound benefi ts. One, it tells you what you know and 
don’t know, and therefore where to focus further study to 
improve the areas where you’re weak. Two, recalling what 
you have learned causes your brain to reconsolidate the mem-
ory, which strengthens its connections to what you already 
know and makes it easier for you to recall in the future. In 
effect, retrieval— testing—interrupts forgetting. Consider an 
eighth grade science class. For the class in question, at a mid-
dle school in Columbia, Illinois, researchers arranged for part 
of the material covered during the course to be the subject of 
low- stakes quizzing (with feedback) at three points in the se-
mester. Another part of the material was never quizzed but 
was studied three times in review. In a test a month later, 
which material was better recalled? The students averaged 
A- on the material that was quizzed and C+ on the material 
that was not quizzed but reviewed.13
In Matt Brown’s case, even after ten years pi loting the 
same business jet, his employer reinforces his mastery every 
six months in a battery of tests and fl ight simulations that re-
quire him to retrieve the information and maneuvers that are 
essential to stay in control of his plane. As Matt points out, 
you hardly ever have an emergency, so if you don’t practice 
what to do, there’s no way to keep it fresh.
Both of these cases— the research in the classroom and the 
experience of Matt Brown in updating his knowledge— point 
to the critical role of retrieval practice in keeping our knowl-
edge accessible to us when we need it. The power of active 
retrieval is the topic of Chapter 2.14

Learning Is Misunderstood ê 21
The Takeaway
For the most part, we are going about learning in the wrong 
ways, and we are giving poor advice to those who are coming 
up behind us. A great deal of what we think we know about 
how to learn is taken on faith and based on intuition but does 
not hold up under empirical research. Per sis tent illusions of 
knowing lead us to labor at unproductive strategies; as 
 recounted in Chapter 3, this is true even of people who have 
participated in empirical studies and seen the evidence for 
themselves, fi rsthand. Illusions are potent persuaders. One 
of the best habits a learner can instill in herself is regular self- 
quizzing to recalibrate her understanding of what she does 
and does not know. Second Lieutenant Kiley Hunkler, a 2013 
graduate of West Point and winner of a Rhodes Scholarship, 
whom we write about in Chapter 8, uses the phrase “shooting 
an azimuth” to describe how she takes practice tests to help 
refocus her studying. In overland navigation, shooting an azi-
muth means climbing to a height, sighting an object on the 
horizon in the direction you’re traveling, and adjusting your 
compass heading to make sure you’re still gaining on your 
objective as you beat through the forest below.
The good news is that we now know of simple and practical 
strategies that anybody can use, at any point in life, to learn 
better and remember longer: various forms of retrieval prac-
tice, such as low- stakes quizzing and self- testing, spacing out 
practice, interleaving the practice of different but related top-
ics or skills, trying to solve a problem before being taught the 
solution, distilling the underlying principles or rules that dif-
ferentiate types of problems, and so on. In the chapters that 
follow we describe these in depth. And because learning is an 
iterative pro cess that requires that you revisit what you have 

Make It Stick ê 22
learned earlier and continually update it and connect it with 
new knowledge, we circle through these topics several times 
along the way. At the end, in Chapter 8, we pull it all to-
gether with specifi c tips and examples for putting these tools 
to work.

23
Mike Ebersold got called into a hospi-
tal emergency room one afternoon late in 2011 to examine a 
Wisconsin deer hunter who’d been found lying unconscious 
in a cornfi eld. The man had blood at the back of his head, and 
the men who’d found and brought him in supposed he’d 
maybe stumbled and cracked his skull on something.
Ebersold is a neurosurgeon. The injury had brain protrud-
ing, and he recognized it as a gunshot wound. The hunter re-
gained consciousness in the ER, but when asked how he’d hurt 
himself, he had no idea.
Recounting the incident later, Ebersold said, “Somebody 
from some distance away must have fi red what appeared to 
be a 12- gauge shotgun, which arced over God only knows 
what distance, hit this guy in the back of his head, fractured 
his skull, and lodged into the brain about an inch. It must have 
been pretty much spent, or it would have gone deeper.”1
2
To Learn, Retrieve

Make It Stick ê 24
Ebersold is tall, slender, and counts among his forebears 
the Dakota chiefs named Wapasha and the French fur traders 
named Rocque who populated this part of the Mississippi 
River Valley where the Mayo brothers would later found 
their famous clinic. Ebersold’s formal training included four 
years of college, four years of medical school, and seven years 
of neurosurgery training— building a foundation of knowl-
edge and skills that has been broadened and deepened through 
continuing medical education classes, consultations with his 
colleagues, and his practice at the Mayo Clinic and elsewhere. 
He carries himself with a midwestern modesty that belies a 
career that counts a long list of high- profi le patients who have 
sought out his ser vices. When President Ronald Reagan needed 
treatment for injuries after a fall from his  horse, Ebersold par-
ticipated in the surgery and postsurgical care. When Sheikh 
Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, president of the United Arab 
Emirates, needed delicate spinal repair, he and what seemed 
like half the nation’s ministry and security forces settled in 
Rochester while Mike Ebersold made the repair and oversaw 
Zayed’s recovery. Following a long career at Mayo, Mike had 
returned to help out at the clinic in Wisconsin, feeling indebted 
to it for his early medical training. The hunter whose bad luck 
put him in the way of an errant 12- gauge slug was luckier 
than he likely knows that Mike was on the job that day.
The bullet had entered an area of the skull beneath which 
there is a large venous sinus, a soft- tissue channel that drains 
the brain cavity. As he examined the hunter, Ebersold knew 
from experience that when he opened up the wound, there 
was a high probability he would fi nd this vein was torn. As he 
described it,
You say to yourself, “This patient is going to need surgery. 
There’s brain coming out of the wound. We have to clean this 

To Learn, Retrieve ê 25
up and repair this as best we can, but in so doing we may get 
into this big vein and that could be very, very serious.” So you 
go through the checklist. You say, “I might need a blood trans-
fusion for this patient,” so you set up some blood. You review 
the steps, A, B, C, and D. You set up the operating room, tell-
ing them ahead of time what you might be encountering. All 
of this is sort of protocol, pretty much like a cop getting ready 
to pull over a car, you know what the book says, you’ve gone 
through all these steps.
Then you get to the operating room, and now you’re still in 
this mode where you have time to think through it. You say, 
“Gee, I don’t want to just go and pull that bullet out if there 
might be major bleeding. What I’ll try to do is I’ll work around 
the edges and get things freed up so I’m ready for what could 
go wrong, and then I’ll pull it out.”
It turned out that the bullet and bone  were lodged in the vein, 
serving as plugs, another lucky turn for the hunter. If the 
wound hadn’t corked itself in the fi eld, he would not have 
lived for more than two or three minutes. When Ebersold re-
moved the bullet, the fractured bone chips fell away, and the 
vein let loose in a torrent. “Within fi ve minutes, you’ve lost 
two or so units of blood and now you sort of transfer out of 
the mode where you’re thinking through this, going through 
the options. Now it becomes refl ex, mechanical. You know it’s 
going to bleed very, very much, so you have a very short time. 
You’re just thinking, ‘I have to get a suture around this struc-
ture, and I know from previous experience I have to do it in 
this par tic u lar way.’ ”
The vein in question, which is about the size of an adult’s 
small fi nger, was torn in several places over a distance of about 
an inch and a half. It needed to be tied off above and below 
the rupture, but it’s a fl at structure that he knows well: you 

Make It Stick ê 26
 can’t just put a stitch around it, because when you tighten it, 
the tissue tears, and the ligature leaks. Working urgently and 
mechanically, he fell back on a technique he’d developed out 
of necessity in past surgeries involving this vein. He cut two 
little pieces of muscle, from where the patient’s skin had been 
opened up in surgery, and imported them to the site and 
stitched the ends of the torn vein to them. These plugs of 
muscle served to close the vein without defl ecting its natural 
shape or tearing its tissue. It’s a solution Mike has taught 
himself— one he says you won’t fi nd written anywhere, but 
handy in the moment, to say the least. In the sixty or so sec-
onds it took to do, the patient lost another two hundred cubic 
centimeters of blood, but once the plugs  were in place, the 
bleeding stopped. “Some people  can’t tolerate this sinus vein 
being closed off. They get increased brain pressure because 
the blood  doesn’t drain properly. But this patient was one of 
the fortunate who can.” The hunter left the hospital a week 
later. He was minus some peripheral vision but otherwise re-
markably unscathed from a very close brush with mortality.
Reﬂ ection Is a Form of Practice
What inferences can we draw from this story about how we 
learn and remember? In neurosurgery (and, arguably, in all 
aspects of life from the moment you leave the womb), there’s 
an essential kind of learning that comes from refl ection on 
personal experience. Ebersold described it this way:
A lot of times something would come up in surgery that I had 
diffi culty with, and then I’d go home that night thinking about 
what happened and what could I do, for example, to improve 
the way a suturing went. How can I take a bigger bite with my 
needle, or a smaller bite, or should the stitches be closer to-
gether? What if I modifi ed it this way or that way? Then the 

To Learn, Retrieve ê 27
next day back, I’d try that and see if it worked better. Or even 
if it  wasn’t the next day, at least I’ve thought through this, and 
in so doing I’ve not only revisited things that I learned from 
lectures or from watching others performing surgery but also 
I’ve complemented that by adding something of my own to it 
that I missed during the teaching pro cess.
Refl ection can involve several cognitive activities that lead 
to stronger learning: retrieving knowledge and earlier training 
from memory, connecting these to new experiences, and visu-
alizing and mentally rehearsing what you might do differently 
next time.
It was this kind of refl ection that originally had led Eber-
sold to try a new technique for repairing the sinus vein at the 
back of the head, a technique he practiced in his mind and in 
the operating room until it became the kind of refl exive maneu-
ver you can depend on when your patient is spouting blood at 
two hundred cubic centimeters a minute.
To make sure the new learning is available when it’s needed, 
Ebersold points out, “you memorize the list of things that you 
need to worry about in a given situation: steps A, B, C, and D,” 
and you drill on them. Then there comes a time when you get 
into a tight situation and it’s no longer a matter of thinking 
through the steps, it’s a matter of refl exively taking the cor-
rect action. “Unless you keep recalling this maneuver, it will 
not become a refl ex. Like a race car driver in a tight situation 
or a quarterback dodging a tackle, you’ve got to act out of re-
fl ex before you’ve even had time to think. Recalling it over and 
over, practicing it over and over. That’s just so important.”

Make It Stick ê 28
The Testing Effect
A child stringing cranberries on a thread goes to hang them 
on the tree, only to fi nd they’ve slipped off the other end. With-
out the knot, there’s no making a string. Without the knot there’s 
no necklace, there’s no beaded purse, no magnifi cent tapestry. 
Retrieval ties the knot for memory. Repeated retrieval snugs it 
up and adds a loop to make it fast.
Since as far back as 1885, psychologists have been plotting 
“forgetting curves” that illustrate just how fast our cranberries 
slip off the string. In very short order we lose something like 
70 percent of what  we’ve just heard or read. After that, forget-
ting begins to slow, and the last 30 percent or so falls away 
more slowly, but the lesson is clear: a central challenge to im-
proving the way we learn is fi nding a way to interrupt the pro-
cess of forgetting.2
The power of retrieval as a learning tool is known among 
psychologists as the testing effect. In its most common form, 
testing is used to mea sure learning and assign grades in school, 
but  we’ve long known that the act of retrieving knowledge 
from memory has the effect of making that knowledge easier 
to call up again in the future. In his essay on memory, Aristotle 
wrote: “exercise in repeatedly recalling a thing strengthens the 
memory.” Francis Bacon wrote about this phenomenon, as did 
the psychologist William James. Today, we know from empiri-
cal research that practicing retrieval makes learning stick far 
better than reexposure to the original material does. This is the 
testing effect, also known as the retrieval- practice effect.3
To be most effective, retrieval must be repeated again and 
again, in spaced out sessions so that the recall, rather than 
becoming a mindless recitation, requires some cognitive ef-
fort. Repeated recall appears to help memory consolidate into 
a cohesive repre sen ta tion in the brain and to strengthen and 

To Learn, Retrieve ê 29
multiply the neural routes by which the knowledge can later 
be retrieved. In recent de cades, studies have confi rmed what 
Mike Ebersold and every seasoned quarterback, jet pi lot, and 
teenaged texter knows from experience— that repeated re-
trieval can so embed knowledge and skills that they become 
refl exive: the brain acts before the mind has time to think.
Yet despite what research and personal experience tell us 
about the power of testing as a learning tool, teachers and stu-
dents in traditional educational settings rarely use it as such, 
and the technique remains little understood or utilized by teach-
ers or students as a learning tool in traditional educational 
settings. Far from it.
In 2010 the New York Times reported on a scientifi c study 
that showed that students who read a passage of text and then 
took a test asking them to recall what they had read retained 
an astonishing 50 percent more of the information a week 
later than students who had not been tested. This would seem 
like good news, but  here’s how it was greeted in many online 
comments:
“Once again, another author confuses learning with recalling 
information.”
“I personally would like to avoid as many tests as possible, 
especially with my grade on the line. Trying to learn in a stress-
ful environment is no way to help retain information.”
“Nobody should care whether memorization is enhanced by 
practice testing or not. Our children cannot do much of any-
thing anymore.”4
Forget memorization, many commenters argued; education 
should be about high- order skills. Hmmm. If memorization 
is irrelevant to complex problem solving, don’t tell your 

Make It Stick ê 30
neurosurgeon. The frustration many people feel toward stan-
dardized, “dipstick” tests given for the sole purpose of mea-
sur ing learning is understandable, but it steers us away from 
appreciating one of the most potent learning tools available 
to us. Pitting the learning of basic knowledge against the de-
velopment of creative thinking is a false choice. Both need to 
be cultivated. The stronger one’s knowledge about the subject 
at hand, the more nuanced one’s creativity can be in address-
ing a new problem. Just as knowledge amounts to little with-
out the exercise of ingenuity and imagination, creativity ab-
sent a sturdy foundation of knowledge builds a shaky  house.
Studying the Testing Effect in the Lab
The testing effect has a solid pedigree in empirical research. 
The fi rst large- scale investigation was published in 1917. 
Children in grades 3, 5, 6, and 8 studied brief biographies 
from Who’s Who in America. Some of them were directed to 
spend varying lengths of the study time looking up from the 
material and silently reciting to themselves what it contained. 
Those who did not do so simply continued to reread the ma-
terial. At the end of the period, all the children  were asked to 
write down what they could remember. The recall test was 
repeated three to four hours later. All the groups who had 
engaged in the recitation showed better retention than those 
who had not done so but had merely continued to review the 
material. The best results  were from those spending about 60 
percent of the study time in recitation.
A second landmark study, published in 1939, tested over 
three thousand sixth graders across Iowa. The kids studied 
six- hundred- word articles and then took tests at various times 
before a fi nal test two months later. The experiment showed a 
couple of interesting results: the longer the fi rst test was de-
layed, the greater the forgetting, and second, once a student 

To Learn, Retrieve ê 31
had taken a test, the forgetting nearly stopped, and the stu-
dent’s score on subsequent tests dropped very little.5
Around 1940, interest turned to the study of forgetting, 
and investigating the potential of testing as a form of retrieval 
practice and as a learning tool fell out of favor. So did the use 
of testing as a research tool: since testing interrupts forgetting, 
you  can’t use it to mea sure forgetting because that “contami-
nates” the subject.
Interest in the testing effect resurfaced in 1967 with the 
publication of a study showing that research subjects who 
 were presented with lists of thirty- six words learned as much 
from repeated testing after initial exposure to the words as 
they did from repeated studying. These results— that testing 
led to as much learning as studying did— challenged the re-
ceived wisdom, turned researchers’ attention back to the po-
tential of testing as a learning tool, and stimulated a boomlet 
in testing research.
In 1978, researchers found that massed studying (cram-
ming) leads to higher scores on an immediate test but results 
in faster forgetting compared to practicing retrieval. In a sec-
ond test two days after an initial test, the crammers had for-
gotten 50 percent of what they had been able to recall on the 
initial test, while those who had spent the same period prac-
ticing retrieval instead of studying had forgotten only 13 per-
cent of the information recalled initially.
A subsequent study was aimed at understanding what ef-
fect taking multiple tests would have on subjects’ long- term 
retention. Students heard a story that named sixty concrete 
objects. Those students who  were tested immediately after 
exposure recalled 53 percent of the objects on this initial test 
but only 39 percent a week later. On the other hand, a group 
of students who learned the same material but  were not tested 
at all until a week later recalled 28 percent. Thus, taking a 
single test boosted per for mance by 11 percent after a week. 

Make It Stick ê 32
But what effect would three immediate tests have relative to 
one? Another group of students  were tested three times after 
initial exposure and a week later they  were able to recall 53 
percent of the objects— the same as on the initial test for the 
group receiving one test. In effect, the group that received 
three tests had been “immunized” against forgetting, com-
pared to the one- test group, and the one- test group remem-
bered more than those who had received no test immediately 
following exposure. Thus, and in agreement with later research, 
multiple sessions of retrieval practice are generally better than 
one, especially if the test sessions are spaced out.6
In another study, researchers showed that simply asking a 
subject to fi ll in a word’s missing letters resulted in better 
memory of the word. Consider a list of word pairs. For a pair 
like foot-shoe, those who studied the pair intact had lower sub-
sequent recall than those who studied the pair from a clue as 
obvious as foot-s_ _e. This experiment was a demonstration of 
what researchers call the “generation effect.” The modest effort 
required to generate the cued answer while studying the pairs 
strengthened memory of the target word tested later (shoe). 
Interestingly, this study found that the ability to recall the word 
pair on later tests was greater if the practice retrieval was de-
layed by twenty intervening word pairs than when it came im-
mediately after fi rst studying the pair.7 Why would that be? 
One argument suggested that the greater effort required by the 
delayed recall solidifi ed the memory better. Researchers began 
to ask whether the schedule of testing mattered.
The answer is yes. When retrieval practice is spaced, allow-
ing some forgetting to occur between tests, it leads to stronger 
long- term retention than when it is massed.
Researchers began looking for opportunities to take their 
inquiries out of the lab and into the classroom, using the kinds 
of materials students are required to learn in school.

To Learn, Retrieve ê 33
Studying the Testing Effect “In the Wild”
In 2005, we and our colleagues approached Roger Cham-
berlain, the principal of a middle school in nearby Columbia, 
Illinois, with a proposition. The positive effects of retrieval 
practice had been demonstrated many times in controlled lab-
oratory settings but rarely in a regular classroom setting. 
Would the principal, teachers, kids, and parents of Colum-
bia Middle School be willing subjects in a study to see how 
the testing effect would work “in the wild”?
Chamberlain had concerns. If this was just about memori-
zation, he  wasn’t especially interested. His aim is to raise the 
school’s students to higher forms of learning— analysis, synthe-
sis, and application, as he put it. And he was concerned about 
his teachers, an energetic faculty with curricula and varied 
instructional methods he was loath to disrupt. On the other 
hand, the study’s results could be instructive, and participa-
tion would bring enticements in the form of smart boards and 
“clickers”— automated response systems—for the classrooms 
of participating teachers. Money for new technology is fa-
mously tight.
A sixth grade social studies teacher, Patrice Bain, was eager 
to give it a try. For the researchers, a chance to work in the 
classroom was compelling, and the school’s terms  were ac-
cepted: the study would be minimally intrusive by fi tting within 
existing curricula, lesson plans, test formats, and teaching 
methods. The same textbooks would be used. The only differ-
ence in the class would be the introduction of occasional short 
quizzes. The study would run for three semesters (a year and 
a half), through several chapters of the social studies textbook, 
covering topics such as ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, India, 
and China. The project was launched in 2006. It would prove 
to be a good decision.

Make It Stick ê 34
For the six social studies classes a research assistant, Pooja 
Agarwal, designed a series of quizzes that would test students 
on roughly one- third of the material covered by the teacher. 
These quizzes  were for “no stakes,” meaning that scores  were 
not counted toward a grade. The teacher excused herself from 
the classroom for each quiz so as to remain unaware of which 
material was being tested. One quiz was given at the start of 
class, on material from assigned reading that hadn’t yet been 
discussed. A second was given at the end of class after the 
teacher had covered the material for the day’s lesson. And a 
review quiz was given twenty- four hours before each unit 
exam.
There was concern that if students tested better in the fi nal 
exam on material that had been quizzed than on material not 
quizzed, it could be argued that the simple act of reexposing 
them to the material in the quizzes was responsible for the 
superior learning, not the retrieval practice. To counter this 
possibility, some of the nonquizzed material was interspersed 
with the quiz material, provided as simple review statements, 
like “The Nile River has two major tributaries: the White Nile 
and the Blue Nile,” with no retrieval required. The facts  were 
quizzed for some classes but just restudied for others.
The quizzes took only a few minutes of classroom time. 
After the teacher stepped out of the room, Agarwal projected 
a series of slides onto the board at the front of the room and 
read them to the students. Each slide presented either a mul-
tiple choice question or a statement of fact. When the slide 
contained a question, students used clickers (handheld, cell- 
phone- like remotes) to indicate their answer choice: A, B, C, 
or D. When all had responded, the correct answer was revealed, 
so as to provide feedback and correct errors. (Although teachers 
 were not present for these quizzes, under normal circumstances, 

To Learn, Retrieve ê 35
with teachers administering quizzes, they would see immedi-
ately how well students are tracking the study material and 
use the results to guide further discussion or study.)
Unit exams  were the normal pencil- and- paper tests given 
by the teacher. Exams  were also given at the end of the se-
mester and at the end of the year. Students had been exposed 
to all of the material tested in these exams through the teacher’s 
normal classroom lessons, homework, worksheets, and so 
on, but they had also been quizzed three times on one- third 
of the material, and they had seen another third presented 
for additional study three times. The balance of the material 
was neither quizzed nor additionally reviewed in class beyond 
the initial lesson and what ever reading a student may have 
done.
The results  were compelling: The kids scored a full grade 
level higher on the material that had been quizzed than on the 
material that had not been quizzed. Moreover, test results for 
the material that had been reviewed as statements of fact but 
not quizzed  were no better than those for the nonreviewed 
material. Again, mere rereading does not much help.
In 2007, the research was extended to eighth grade science 
classes, covering ge ne tics, evolution, and anatomy. The regi-
men was the same, and the results equally impressive. At the 
end of three semesters, the eighth graders averaged 79 percent 
(C+) on the science material that had not been quizzed, com-
pared to 92 percent (A−) on the material that had been quizzed.
The testing effect persisted eight months later at the end- 
of- year exams, confi rming what many laboratory studies have 
shown about the long- term benefi ts of retrieval practice. The 
effect doubtless would have been greater if the retrieval prac-
tice had continued and occurred once a month, say, in the in-
tervening months.8

Make It Stick ê 36
The lesson from these studies has been taken to heart by 
many of the teachers at Columbia Middle School. Long after 
concluding their participation in the research studies, Patrice 
Bain’s sixth grade social studies classes continue today to fol-
low a schedule of quizzes before lessons, quizzes after lessons, 
and then a review quiz prior to the chapter test. Jon Wehren-
berg, an eighth grade history teacher who was not part of the 
research, has knitted retrieval practice into his classroom in 
many different forms, including quizzing, and he provides ad-
ditional online tools at his website, like fl ashcards and games. 
After reading passages on the history of slavery, for example, 
his students are asked to write down ten facts about slavery 
they hadn’t known before reading the passages. You don’t 
need electronic gadgetry to practice retrieval.
Seven sixth and seventh graders needing to improve their 
reading and comprehension skills sat in Michelle Spivey’s En-
glish classroom one period recently with their reading books 
open to an amusing story. Each student was invited to read a 
paragraph aloud. Where a student stumbled, Miss Spivey had 
him try again. When he’d gotten it right, she probed the class 
to explain the meaning of the passage and what might have 
been going on in the characters’ minds. Retrieval and elabora-
tion; again, no technology required.
Quizzes at Columbia Middle School are not onerous events. 
Following completion of the research studies, students’ views 
 were surveyed on this question. Sixty- four percent said the 
quizzing reduced their anxiety over unit exams, and 89 percent 
felt it increased learning. The kids expressed disappointment 
on days when clickers  were not used, because the activity broke 
up the teacher’s lecture and proved enjoyable.
Principal Chamberlain, when asked what he thought the 
study results indicated, replied simply: “Retrieval practice has 
a signifi cant impact on kids’ learning. This is telling us that 

To Learn, Retrieve ê 37
it’s valuable, and that teachers are well advised to incorporate 
it into their instructional technique.”9
Are similar effects found at a later age?
Andrew Sobel teaches a class in international po liti cal eco-
nomics at Washington University in St. Louis, a lecture course 
populated by 160– 170 students, mostly freshmen and sopho-
mores. Over a period of several years he noticed a growing 
problem with attendance. On any given day by midsemester, 
25– 35 percent of the class would be absent, compared to ear-
lier in the semester when maybe 10 percent would be absent. 
The problem  wasn’t unique to his class, he says. A lot of pro-
fessors give students their PowerPoint slides, so the students 
just stop coming to class. Sobel fought back by withholding 
his slides, but by the end of the semester, many students 
stopped showing up anyway. The class syllabus included two 
big tests, a midterm and a fi nal. Looking for some way to 
leverage attendance, Sobel replaced the big tests with nine 
pop quizzes. Because the quizzes would determine the course 
grade and would be unannounced, students would be well 
advised to show up for class.
The results  were distressing. Over the semester, a third or 
more of the students bailed out. “I really got hammered in the 
teaching reviews,” Sobel told us. “The kids hated it. If they 
didn’t do well on a quiz they dropped the course rather than 
get a bad grade in it. Of those who stayed, I got this bifurcation 
between those who actually showed up and did the work, and 
those who didn’t. I found myself handing out A-plusses, which 
I’d never given before, and more Cs than I’d ever given.”10
With so much pushback, he had little choice but to drop the 
experiment and reinstate the old format, lectures with a mid-
term and fi nal. A couple of years later, however, after hearing a 

Make It Stick ê 38
pre sen ta tion about the learning benefi ts of testing, he added a 
third major test during the semester to see what effect it 
might have on his students’ learning. They did better, but 
not by as much as he’d hoped, and the attendance problems 
persisted.
He scratched his head and changed the syllabus once again. 
This time he announced that there would be nine quizzes dur-
ing the semester, and he was explicit about when they would 
be. No surprises, and no midterm or fi nal exams, because he 
didn’t want to give up that much of his lecture time.
Despite fears that enrollments would plummet again, they 
actually increased by a handful. “Unlike the pop quizzes, which 
kids hate, these  were all on the syllabus. If they missed one it 
was their own fault. It  wasn’t because I surprised them or was 
being pernicious. They  were comfortable with that.” Sobel took 
satisfaction in seeing attendance improve as well. “They would 
skip some classes on the days they didn’t have a quiz, particu-
larly the spring semester, but they showed up for the quizzes.”
Like the course, the quizzes  were cumulative, and the ques-
tions  were similar to those on the exams he used to give, but 
the quality of the answers he was getting by midsemester was 
much better than he was accustomed to seeing on the mid-
terms. Five years into this new format, he’s sold on it. “The 
quality of discussions in class has gone way up. I see that big 
a difference in their written work, just by going from three 
exams to nine quizzes.” By the end of the semester he has them 
writing paragraphs on the concepts covered in class, some-
times a full- page essay, and the quality is comparable to what 
he’s seeing in his upper division classes.
“Anybody can design this structure. But I also realize that, 
Oh, god, if I’d done this years ago I would have taught them 
that much more stuff. The interesting thing about adopting 
this strategy is I now recognize that as good a teacher as I 

To Learn, Retrieve ê 39
might think I am, my teaching is only a component of their 
learning, and how I structure it has a lot to do with it, maybe 
even more.” Meanwhile, the course enrollment has grown to 
185 and counting.
Exploring Nuances
Andy Sobel’s example is anecdotal and likely refl ects a variety 
of benefi cial infl uences, not least being the cumulative learn-
ing effects that accrue like compounded interest when course 
material is carried forward in a regime of quizzes across an 
entire semester. Nonetheless, his experience squares with em-
pirical research designed to tease apart the effects and nu-
ances of testing.
For example, in one experiment college students studied 
prose passages on various scientifi c topics like those taught in 
college and then either took an immediate recall test after the 
initial exposure or restudied the material. After a delay of two 
days, the students who took the initial test recalled more of 
the material than those who simply restudied it (68 v. 54 per-
cent), and this advantage was sustained a week later (56 v. 42 
percent). Another experiment found that after one week a 
study- only group showed the most forgetting of what they ini-
tially had been able to recall, forgetting 52 percent, compared 
to a repeated- testing group, who forgot only 10 percent.11
How does giving feedback on wrong answers to test questions 
affect learning? Studies show that giving feedback strengthens 
retention more than testing alone does, and, interestingly, 
some evidence shows that delaying the feedback briefl y pro-
duces better long- term learning than immediate feedback. This 
fi nding is counterintuitive but is consistent with researchers’ 

Make It Stick ê 40
discoveries about how we learn motor tasks, like making lay-
ups or driving a golf ball toward a distant green. In motor 
learning, trial and error with delayed feedback is a more awk-
ward but effective way of acquiring a skill than trial and cor-
rection through immediate feedback; immediate feedback is 
like the training wheels on a bicycle: the learner quickly comes 
to depend on the continued presence of the correction.
In the case of learning motor skills, one theory holds that 
when there’s immediate feedback it comes to be part of the 
task, so that later, in a real- world setting, its absence becomes 
a gap in the established pattern that disrupts per for mance. 
Another idea holds that frequent interruptions for feedback 
make the learning sessions too variable, preventing establish-
ment of a stabilized pattern of per for mance.12
In the classroom, delayed feedback also yields better long- 
term learning than immediate feedback does. In the case of 
the students studying prose passages on science topics, some 
 were shown the passage again even while they  were asked to 
answer questions about it, in effect providing them with con-
tinuous feedback during the test, analogous to an open- book 
exam. The other group took the test without the study mate-
rial at hand and only afterward  were given the passage and 
instructed to look over their responses. Of course, the open- 
book group performed best on the immediate test, but those 
who got corrective feedback after completing the test retained 
the learning better on a later test. Delayed feedback on writ-
ten tests may help because it gives the student practice that’s 
spaced out in time; as discussed in the next chapter, spacing 
practice improves retention.13
Are some kinds of retrieval practice more effective for long- 
term learning than others? Tests that require the learner to 

To Learn, Retrieve ê 41
supply the answer, like an essay or short- answer test, or sim-
ply practice with fl ashcards, appear to be more effective than 
simple recognition tests like multiple choice or true/false tests. 
However, even multiple choice tests like those used at Colum-
bia Middle School can yield strong benefi ts. While any kind 
of retrieval practice generally benefi ts learning, the implication 
seems to be that where more cognitive effort is required for 
retrieval, greater retention results. Retrieval practice has been 
studied extensively in recent years, and an analysis of these 
studies shows that even a single test in a class can produce a 
large improvement in fi nal exam scores, and gains in learning 
continue to increase as the number of tests increases.14
Whichever theories science eventually tells us are correct 
about how repeated retrieval strengthens memory, empirical 
research shows us that the testing effect is real— that the act 
of retrieving a memory changes the memory, making it easier 
to retrieve again later.
How widely is retrieval practice used as a study technique? In 
one survey, college students  were largely unaware of its effec-
tiveness. In another survey, only 11 percent of college students 
said they use this study strategy. Even when they did report 
testing themselves, they mostly said they did it to discover what 
they didn’t know, so they could study that material more. 
That’s a perfectly valid use of testing, but few students realize 
that retrieval itself creates greater retention.15
Is repeated testing simply a way to expedite rote learning? In 
fact, research indicates that testing, compared to rereading, 
can facilitate better transfer of knowledge to new contexts 
and problems, and that it improves one’s ability to retain and 

Make It Stick ê 42
retrieve material that is related but not tested. Further re-
search is needed on this point, but it seems that retrieval prac-
tice can make information more accessible when it is needed 
in various contexts.
Do students resist testing as a tool for learning? Students do 
generally dislike the idea of tests, and it’s not hard to see why, 
in par tic u lar in the case of high- stakes tests like midterms and 
fi nals, where the score comes with signifi cant consequences. 
Yet in all studies of testing that reported students’ attitudes, 
the students who  were tested frequently rated their classes 
more favorably at the end of the semester than those tested 
less frequently. Those who  were frequently tested reached the 
end of the semester on top of the material and did not need to 
cram for exams.
How does taking a test affect subsequent studying? After a test, 
students spend more time restudying the material they missed, 
and they learn more from it than do their peers who restudy the 
material without having been tested. Students whose study 
strategies emphasize rereading but not self- testing show over-
confi dence in their mastery. Students who have been quizzed 
have a double advantage over those who have not: a more 
accurate sense of what they know and don’t know, and the 
strengthening of learning that accrues from retrieval practice.16
Are there any further, indirect benefi ts of regular, low- stakes 
classroom testing? Besides strengthening learning and reten-
tion, a regime of this kind of testing improves student atten-
dance. It increases studying before class (because students 

To Learn, Retrieve ê 43
know they’ll be quizzed), increases attentiveness during class 
if students are tested at the end of class, and enables students 
to better calibrate what they know and where they need to 
bone up. It’s an antidote to mistaking fl uency with the text, 
resulting from repeated readings, for mastery of the subject. 
Frequent low- stakes testing helps dial down test anxiety 
among students by diversifying the consequences over a much 
larger sample: no single test is a make- or- break event. And 
this kind of testing enables instructors to identify gaps in stu-
dents’ understanding and adapt their instruction to fi ll them. 
These benefi ts of low- stakes testing accrue whether instruc-
tion is delivered online or in the classroom.17
The Takeaway
Practice at retrieving new knowledge or skill from memory is 
a potent tool for learning and durable retention. This is true 
for anything the brain is asked to remember and call up again 
in the future— facts, complex concepts, problem- solving tech-
niques, motor skills.
Effortful retrieval makes for stronger learning and reten-
tion.  We’re easily seduced into believing that learning is better 
when it’s easier, but the research shows the opposite: when 
the mind has to work, learning sticks better. The greater the 
effort to retrieve learning, provided that you succeed, the more 
that learning is strengthened by retrieval. After an initial test, 
delaying subsequent retrieval practice is more potent for rein-
forcing retention than immediate practice, because delayed 
retrieval requires more effort.
Repeated retrieval not only makes memories more durable 
but produces knowledge that can be retrieved more readily, 
in more varied settings, and applied to a wider variety of 
problems.

Make It Stick ê 44
While cramming can produce better scores on an immedi-
ate exam, the advantage quickly fades because there is much 
greater forgetting after rereading than after retrieval practice. 
The benefi ts of retrieval practice are long- term.
Simply including one test (retrieval practice) in a class 
yields a large improvement in fi nal exam scores, and gains 
continue to increase as the frequency of classroom testing 
increases.
Testing  doesn’t need to be initiated by the instructor. Stu-
dents can practice retrieval anywhere; no quizzes in the class-
room are necessary. Think fl ashcards— the way second grad-
ers learn the multiplication tables can work just as well for 
learners at any age to quiz themselves on anatomy, mathemat-
ics, or law. Self- testing may be unappealing because it takes 
more effort than rereading, but as noted already, the greater 
the effort at retrieval, the more will be retained.
Students who take practice tests have a better grasp of their 
progress than those who simply reread the material. Similarly, 
such testing enables an instructor to spot gaps and miscon-
ceptions and adapt instruction to correct them.
Giving students corrective feedback after tests keeps them 
from incorrectly retaining material they have misunderstood 
and produces better learning of the correct answers.
Students in classes that incorporate low- stakes quizzing 
come to embrace the practice. Students who are tested fre-
quently rate their classes more favorably.
What about Principal Roger Chamberlain’s initial concerns 
about practice quizzing at Columbia Middle School— that it 
might be nothing more than a glorifi ed path to rote learning?
When we asked him this question after the study was com-
pleted, he paused for a moment to gather his thoughts. “What 

To Learn, Retrieve ê 45
I’ve really gained a comfort level with is this: for kids to be 
able to evaluate, synthesize, and apply a concept in different 
settings, they’re going to be much more effi cient at getting 
there when they have the base of knowledge and the reten-
tion, so they’re not wasting time trying to go back and fi gure 
out what that word might mean or what that concept was 
about. It allows them to go to a higher level.”

46
It may not be intuitive that retrieval 
practice is a more powerful learning strategy than repeated 
review and rereading, yet most of us take for granted the 
importance of testing in sports. It’s what we call “practice- 
practice- practice.” Well,  here’s a study that may surprise you.
A group of eight- year- olds practiced tossing beanbags into 
buckets in gym class. Half of the kids tossed into a bucket three 
feet away. The other half mixed it up by tossing into buckets 
two feet and four feet away. After twelve weeks of this they 
 were all tested on tossing into a three- foot bucket. The kids 
who did the best by far  were those who’d practiced on two- 
and four- foot buckets but never on three- foot buckets.1
Why is this? We will come back to the beanbags, but fi rst a 
little insight into a widely held myth about how we learn.
3
Mix Up Your Practice

Mix Up Your Practice ê 47
The Myth of Massed Practice
Most of us believe that learning is better when you go at 
something with single- minded purpose: the practice- practice- 
practice that’s supposed to burn a skill into memory. Faith in 
focused, repetitive practice of one thing at a time until  we’ve 
got it nailed is pervasive among classroom teachers, athletes, 
corporate trainers, and students. Researchers call this kind 
of practice “massed,” and our faith rests in large part on the 
simple fact that when we do it, we can see it making a differ-
ence. Nevertheless, despite what our eyes tell us, this faith is 
misplaced.
If learning can be defi ned as picking up new knowledge or 
skills and being able to apply them later, then how quickly 
you pick something up is only part of the story. Is it still there 
when you need to use it out in the everyday world? While 
practicing is vital to learning and memory, studies have shown 
that practice is far more effective when it’s broken into sepa-
rate periods of training that are spaced out. The rapid gains 
produced by massed practice are often evident, but the rapid 
forgetting that follows is not. Practice that’s spaced out, inter-
leaved with other learning, and varied produces better mas-
tery, longer retention, and more versatility. But these benefi ts 
come at a price: when practice is spaced, interleaved, and 
varied, it requires more effort. You feel the increased effort, 
but not the benefi ts the effort produces. Learning feels slower 
from this kind of practice, and you don’t get the rapid im-
provements and affi rmations you’re accustomed to seeing 
from massed practice. Even in studies where the participants 
have shown superior results from spaced learning, they don’t 
perceive the improvement; they believe they learned better on 
the material where practice was massed.

Make It Stick ê 48
Almost everywhere you look, you fi nd examples of massed 
practice: summer language boot camps, colleges that offer con-
centration in a single subject with the promise of fast learning, 
continuing education seminars for professionals where train-
ing is condensed into a single weekend. Cramming for exams 
is a form of massed practice. It feels like a productive strategy, 
and it may get you through the next day’s midterm, but most 
of the material will be long forgotten by the time you sit down 
for the fi nal. Spacing out your practice feels less productive 
for the very reason that some forgetting has set in and you’ve 
got to work harder to recall the concepts. It  doesn’t feel like 
you’re on top of it. What you don’t sense in the moment is that 
this added effort is making the learning stronger.2
Spaced Practice
The benefi ts of spacing out practice sessions are long estab-
lished, but for a vivid example consider this study of thirty- 
eight surgical residents. They took a series of four short 
lessons in microsurgery: how to reattach tiny vessels. Each 
lesson included some instruction followed by some prac-
tice. Half the docs completed all four lessons in a single day, 
which is the normal in- service schedule. The others completed 
the same four lessons but with a week’s interval between 
them.3
In a test given a month after their last session, those whose 
lessons had been spaced a week apart outperformed their col-
leagues in all areas— elapsed time to complete a surgery, num-
ber of hand movements, and success at reattaching the sev-
ered, pulsating aortas of live rats. The difference in per for mance 
between the two groups was impressive. The residents who 
had taken all four sessions in a single day not only scored 
lower on all mea sures, but 16 percent of them damaged the 

Mix Up Your Practice ê 49
rats’ vessels beyond repair and  were unable to complete their 
surgeries.
Why is spaced practice more effective than massed practice? 
It appears that embedding new learning in long- term memory 
requires a pro cess of consolidation, in which memory traces 
(the brain’s repre sen ta tions of the new learning) are strength-
ened, given meaning, and connected to prior knowledge— a 
pro cess that unfolds over hours and may take several days. 
Rapid- fi re practice leans on short- term memory. Durable 
learning, however, requires time for mental rehearsal and the 
other pro cesses of consolidation. Hence, spaced practice works 
better. The increased effort required to retrieve the learning 
after a little forgetting has the effect of retriggering consoli-
dation, further strengthening memory. We explore some of the 
theories about this pro cess in the next chapter.
Interleaved Practice
Interleaving the practice of two or more subjects or skills is 
also a more potent alternative to massed practice, and  here’s a 
quick example of that. Two groups of college students  were 
taught how to fi nd the volumes of four obscure geometric 
solids (wedge, spheroid, spherical cone, and half cone). One 
group then worked a set of practice problems that  were clus-
tered by problem type (practice four problems for computing 
the volume of a wedge, then four problems for a spheroid, 
 etc.). The other group worked the same practice problems, 
but the sequence was mixed (interleaved) rather than clustered 
by type of problem. Given what  we’ve already presented, the 
results may not surprise you. During practice, the students 
who worked the problems in clusters (that is, massed) averaged 
89 percent correct, compared to only 60 percent for those 
who worked the problems in a mixed sequence. But in the 

Make It Stick ê 50
fi nal test a week later, the students who had practiced solving 
problems clustered by type averaged only 20 percent correct, 
while the students whose practice was interleaved averaged 
63 percent. The mixing of problem types, which boosted fi nal 
test per for mance by a remarkable 215 percent, actually im-
peded per for mance during initial learning.4
Now, suppose you’re a trainer in a company trying to teach 
employees a complicated new pro cess that involves ten proce-
dures. The typical way of doing this is to train up in proce-
dure 1, repeating it many times until the trainees really seem to 
have it down cold. Then you go to procedure 2, you do many 
repetitions of 2, you get that down, and so on. That appears 
to produce fast learning. What would interleaved practice look 
like? You practice procedure 1 just a few times, then switch to 
procedure 4, then switch to 3, then to 7, and so on. (Chapter 
8 tells how Farmers Insurance trains new agents in a spiraling 
series of exercises that cycle back to key skillsets in a seem-
ingly random sequence that adds layers of context and mean-
ing at each turn.)
The learning from interleaved practice feels slower than 
learning from massed practice. Teachers and students sense 
the difference. They can see that their grasp of each element is 
coming more slowly, and the compensating long- term advan-
tage is not apparent to them. As a result, interleaving is unpop-
u lar and seldom used. Teachers dislike it because it feels slug-
gish. Students fi nd it confusing: they’re just starting to get a 
handle on new material and don’t feel on top of it yet when 
they are forced to switch. But the research shows unequivo-
cally that mastery and long- term retention are much better if 
you interleave practice than if you mass it.

Mix Up Your Practice ê 51
Varied Practice
Okay, what about the beanbag study where the kids who did 
best had never practiced the three- foot toss that the other kids 
had only practiced?
The beanbag study focused on mastery of motor skills, but 
much evidence has shown that the underlying principle ap-
plies to cognitive learning as well. The basic idea is that varied 
practice— like tossing your beanbags into baskets at mixed 
distances— improves your ability to transfer learning from 
one situation and apply it successfully to another. You develop 
a broader understanding of the relationships between different 
conditions and the movements required to succeed in them; 
you discern context better and develop a more fl exible “move-
ment vocabulary”— different movements for different situa-
tions. Whether the scope of variable training (e.g., the two- 
and four- foot tosses) must encompass the par tic u lar task (the 
three- foot toss) is subject for further study.
The evidence favoring variable training has been supported 
by recent neuroimaging studies that suggest that different kinds 
of practice engage different parts of the brain. The learning of 
motor skills from varied practice, which is more cognitively 
challenging than massed practice, appears to be consolidated 
in an area of the brain associated with the more diffi cult pro-
cess of learning higher- order motor skills. The learning of mo-
tor skills from massed practice, on the other hand, appears to 
be consolidated in a different area of the brain that is used for 
learning more cognitively simple and less challenging motor 
skills. The inference is that learning gained through the less 
challenging, massed form of practice is encoded in a simpler 
or comparatively impoverished repre sen ta tion than the learn-
ing gained from the varied and more challenging practice 

Make It Stick ê 52
which demands more brain power and encodes the learning 
in a more fl exible repre sen ta tion that can be applied more 
broadly.5
Among athletes, massed practice has long been the rule: 
take your hook shot, knock the twenty- foot putt, work your 
backhand return, throw the pass while rolling out: again and 
again and again— to get it right and train your “muscle mem-
ory.” Or so the notion holds. The benefi ts of variable training 
for motor learning have been gaining broader ac cep tance, 
 albeit slowly. Consider the one- touch pass in hockey. That’s 
where you receive the puck and immediately pass it to a team-
mate who’s moving down the ice, keeping the opposition off 
balance and unable to put pressure on the puck carrier. Jamie 
Kompon, when he was assistant coach of the Los Angeles 
Kings, was in the habit of running team practice on one- touch 
passes from the same position on the rink. Even if this move is 
interleaved with a sequence of other moves in practice, if you 
only do it at the same place on the rink or in the same sequence 
of moves, you are only, as it  were, throwing your beanbags into 
the three- foot bucket. Kompon is onto the difference now and 
has changed up his drills. Since we talked, he’s gone over to 
the Chicago Blackhawks. We would have said “Keep an eye 
on those Blackhawks”  here, but as we revise to go into produc-
tion, Kompon and team have already won the Stanley Cup. 
Perhaps no coincidence?
The benefi ts of variable practice for cognitive as opposed 
to motor skills learning  were shown in a recent experiment that 
adapted the beanbag test to verbal learning: in this case, the 
students solved anagrams– that is, they rearranged letters to 
form words (tmoce becomes comet). Some subjects practiced 
the same anagram over and over, whereas others practiced mul-
tiple anagrams for the word. When they  were all tested on 
the same anagram that the former group had practiced on, 

Mix Up Your Practice ê 53
the latter group performed better on it! The same benefi ts 
will apply whether you are practicing to identify tree species, 
differentiate the principles of case law, or master a new com-
puter program.6
Developing Discrimination Skills
Compared to massed practice, a signifi cant advantage of in-
terleaving and variation is that they help us learn better how 
to assess context and discriminate between problems, selecting 
and applying the correct solution from a range of possibilities. 
In math education, massing is embedded in the textbook: each 
chapter is dedicated to a par tic u lar kind of problem, which you 
study in class and then practice by working, say, twenty ex-
amples for homework before you move on. The next chapter 
has a different type of problem, and you dive into the same 
kind of concentrated learning and practice of that solution. 
On you march, chapter by chapter, through the semester. But 
then, on the fi nal exam, lo and behold, the problems are all 
mixed up: you’re staring at each one in turn, asking yourself 
Which algorithm do I use? Was it in chapter 5, 6, or 7? When 
you have learned under conditions of massed or blocked repe-
tition, you have had no practice on that critical sorting pro cess. 
But this is the way life usually unfolds: problems and oppor-
tunities come at us unpredictably, out of sequence. For our 
learning to have practical value, we must be adept at discerning 
“What kind of problem is this?” so we can select and apply an 
appropriate solution.
Several studies have demonstrated the improved powers of 
discrimination to be gained through interleaved and varied 
practice. One study involved learning to attribute paintings to 
the artists who created them, and another focused on learning 
to identify and classify birds.

Make It Stick ê 54
Researchers initially predicted that massed practice in 
identifying paint ers’ works (that is, studying many examples 
of one paint er’s works before moving on to study many ex-
amples of another’s works) would best help students learn the 
defi ning characteristics of each artist’s style. Massed practice 
of each artist’s works, one artist at a time, would better enable 
students to match artworks to artists later, compared to inter-
leaved exposure to the works of different artists. The idea was 
that interleaving would be too hard and confusing; students 
would never be able to sort out the relevant dimensions. The 
researchers  were wrong. The commonalities among one paint-
er’s works that the students learned through massed practice 
proved less useful than the differences between the works of 
multiple paint ers that the students learned through interleav-
ing. Interleaving enabled better discrimination and produced 
better scores on a later test that required matching the works 
with their paint ers. The interleaving group was also better 
able to match paint ers’ names correctly to new examples of 
their work that the group had never viewed during the learn-
ing phase. Despite these results, the students who participated 
in these experiments persisted in preferring massed practice, 
convinced that it served them better. Even after they took the 
test and could have realized from their own per for mance that 
interleaving was the better strategy for learning, they clung to 
their belief that the concentrated viewing of paintings by one 
artist was better. The myths of massed practice are hard to ex-
orcise, even when you’re experiencing the evidence yourself.7
The power of interleaving practice to improve discrim-
inability has been reaffi rmed in studies of people learning bird 
classifi cation. The challenge  here is more complex than it 
might seem. One study addressed twenty different bird fami-
lies (thrashers, swallows, wrens, fi nches, and so on). Within 
each family, students  were presented with a dozen species 

Mix Up Your Practice ê 55
(brown thrasher, curve- billed thrasher, Bendire’s thrasher, 
 etc.). To identify a bird’s family, you consider a wide range of 
traits like size, plumage, behavior, location, beak shape, iris 
color, and so on. A problem in bird identifi cation is that mem-
bers of a family share many traits in common but not all. For 
instance, many but not all thrashers have a long, slightly 
hooked beak. There are traits that are typical of a family but 
none that occur in all members of that family and can serve as 
unique identifi ers. Because rules for classifi cation can only 
rely on these characteristic traits rather than on defi ning traits 
(ones that hold for every member), bird classifi cation is a mat-
ter of learning concepts and making judgments, not simply 
memorizing features. Interleaved and variable practice 
proved more helpful than massed practice for learning the 
underlying concepts that unite and differentiate the species 
and families.
To paraphrase a conclusion from one of these studies, re-
call and recognition require “factual knowledge,” considered 
to be a lower level of learning than “conceptual knowledge.” 
Conceptual knowledge requires an understanding of the in-
terrelationships of the basic elements within a larger structure 
that enable them to function together. Conceptual knowledge 
is required for classifi cation. Following this logic, some people 
argue that practicing retrieval of facts and exemplars would 
fall short as a strategy for comprehending general characteris-
tics that are required for higher levels of intellectual behavior. 
The bird classifi cation studies suggest the opposite: strategies 
of learning that help students identify and discern complex 
prototypes (family resemblances) can help them grasp the kinds 
of contextual and functional differences that go beyond the 
acquisition of simple forms of knowledge and reach into the 
higher sphere of comprehension.8

Make It Stick ê 56
Improving Complex Mastery for 
Medical Students
The distinction between straightforward knowledge of facts 
and deeper learning that permits fl exible use of the knowledge 
may be a little fuzzy, but it resonates with Douglas Larsen at 
Washington University Medical School in St. Louis, who says 
that the skills required for bird classifi cation are similar to 
those required of a doctor diagnosing what’s wrong with a 
patient. “The reason variety is important is it helps us see 
more nuances in the things that we can compare against,” he 
says. “That comes up a lot in medicine, in the sense that every 
patient visit is a test. There are many layers of explicit and 
implicit memory involved in the ability to discriminate be-
tween symptoms and their interrelationships.” Implicit mem-
ory is your automatic retrieval of past experience in interpret-
ing a new one. For example, the patient comes in and gives 
you a story. As you listen, you’re consciously thinking through 
your mental library to see what fi ts, while also unconsciously 
polling your past experiences to help interpret what the pa-
tient is telling you. “Then you’re left with making a judgment 
call,” Larsen says.9
Larsen is a pediatric neurologist seeing patients in the uni-
versity clinic and hospital. He’s a busy guy: in addition to 
practicing medicine, he supervises the work of physicians in 
training, he teaches, and as time permits, he conducts research 
into medical education, working in collaboration with cogni-
tive psychologists. He’s drawing on all of these roles to redesign 
and strengthen the school’s training curriculum in pediatric 
neurology.
As you’d expect, the medical school employs a wide spec-
trum of instructional techniques. Besides classroom lectures 

Mix Up Your Practice ê 57
and labs, students practice resuscitations and other procedures 
on high- tech mannequins in three simulation centers the 
school maintains. Each “patient” is hooked up to monitors, has 
a heartbeat, blood pressure, pupils that dilate and constrict, 
and the ability to listen and speak, thanks to a controller who 
observes and operates the mannequin from a back room. The 
school also makes use of “standardized patients,” actors who 
follow scripts and exhibit symptoms the students are required 
to diagnose. The center is set up like a regular medical clinic, 
and students must show profi ciency in all aspects of a patient 
encounter, from bedside manner, physical exam skills, and re-
membering to ask the full spectrum of pertinent questions to 
arriving at a diagnosis and treatment plan.
From studies of these teaching methods, Larsen has drawn 
some interesting conclusions. First— and this may seem self- 
evident: you do better on a test to demonstrate your compe-
tency at seeing patients in a clinic if your learning experience 
has involved seeing patients in a clinic. Simply reading about 
patients is not enough. However, on written fi nal exams, medi-
cal students who have examined patients and those who have 
learned via written tests do equally well. The reason is that in 
a written test the student is being given considerable structure 
and being asked for specifi c information. When examining 
the patient, you have to come up on your own with the right 
mental model and the steps to follow. Having practiced these 
steps on patients or simulated patients improves per for mance 
relative to just reading about how to do it. In other words, the 
kind of retrieval practice that proves most effective is one that 
refl ects what you’ll be doing with the knowledge later. It’s not 
just what you know, but how you practice what you know 
that determines how well the learning serves you later. As the 
sports adage goes, “practice like you play and you will play 

Make It Stick ê 58
like you practice.” This conclusion lines up with other research 
into learning, and with some of the more sophisticated training 
practices in science and industry, including the increasingly 
broad use of simulators— not just for jet pi lots and medical 
students but for cops, towboat pi lots, and people in almost 
any fi eld you can name that requires mastery of complex knowl-
edge and skills and where the stakes for getting it right are 
high. Book learning is not enough in these cases; actual hands-
 on practice is needed.
Second, while it is important for a medical student to build 
breadth by seeing a wide variety of patients manifesting dif-
ferent diseases, placing too much emphasis on variety runs 
the risk of underemphasizing repeated retrieval practice on the 
basics— on the typical way the disease presents itself in most 
patients.
“There’s a certain set of diseases that we want you to know 
very well,” Larsen says. “So  we’re going to have you see these 
standardized patients again and again, and assess your per-
for mance until you really have that down and can show us, ‘I 
really do that well.’ It’s not either/or, variety versus repetition. 
We need to make sure  we’re appropriately balanced, and also 
recognize that we sometimes fall into the trap of familiarity. 
‘I’ve already seen a bunch of patients with this problem, I 
don’t need to keep seeing them.’ But really, repeated retrieval 
practice is crucial to long- term retention, and it’s a critical as-
pect of training.”
A third critical aspect is practical experience. For a doctor, 
seeing patients provides a natural cycle of spaced retrieval 
practice, interleaving, and variety. “So much of medicine is 
based on learning by experience, which is why, after the fi rst 
two years, we take students out of the classroom and start 
putting them into clinical settings. A huge question is, what is 

Mix Up Your Practice ê 59
it about learning and experience that come together? We have 
lots of experiences we don’t learn from. What differentiates 
those that teach us something?”
One form of practice that helps us learn from experience, 
as the neurosurgeon Mike Ebersold recounted in Chapter 2, is 
refl ection. Some people are more given to the act of refl ection 
than others, so Doug Larsen has broadened his research to 
study how you might structure refl ection as an integral part 
of the training, helping students cultivate it as a habit. He is 
experimenting with requiring students to write daily or weekly 
summaries of what they did, how it worked, and what they 
might do differently next time to get better results. He specu-
lates that daily refl ection, as a form of spaced retrieval prac-
tice, is probably just as critical in the real- world application of 
medicine as quizzing and testing are in building competencies 
in medical school.
What about the classroom lecture, or the typical in- service 
training conference that’s compressed over a couple of days? 
Larsen fi gures his school’s interns spend 10 percent of their 
time sitting in conferences listening to lectures. It may be a talk 
on metabolic diseases, on different infectious diseases, or on 
different drugs. The speaker puts the PowerPoint slideshow 
up and starts going through it. Usually there’s lunch, and the 
docs eat, listen, and leave.
“In my mind, considering how much forgetting occurs, it’s 
very discouraging that  we’re putting so many resources into 
an activity that, the way it is currently done, learning research 
tells us is so in effec tive. Medical students and residents go to 
these conferences and they have no repeated exposure what-
soever to it. It’s just a matter of happenstance whether they end 
up fi nally seeing a patient in the future whose problem relates 
back to the conference topic. Otherwise, they don’t study the 

Make It Stick ê 60
material, they are certainly not tested on the material, they 
just listen then they walk out.”
At a minimum, Larsen would like to see something done to 
interrupt the forgetting: give a quiz at the end of a conference 
and follow it with spaced retrieval practice. “Make quizzing 
a standard part of the culture and the curriculum. You just 
know every week you’re going to get in your email your ten 
questions that you need to work through.”
He asks, “How are we designing education and training 
systems that prevent or at least intervene in the amount of 
forgetting that goes on, and making sure they’re systematic 
throughout the school in support of what  we’re trying to ac-
complish? As it stands now, medical resident programs are 
simply dictating: you have to have the curriculum, you have to 
have the conferences, and it ends there. They present these big 
conferences, they have all the faculty come through and give 
their talks. And in the end, what we actually accomplish is re-
ally kind of minimal.”10
These Principles Are Broadly Applicable
College football might seem an incongruous place to look for 
a learning model, but a conversation with Coach Vince Dooley 
about the University of Georgia’s practice regime provides an 
intriguing case.
Dooley is authoritative on the subject. As head coach of 
Bulldogs football from 1964– 1988, he piled up an astonish-
ing 201 wins with only 77 losses and 10 tied games, winning 
six conference titles and a national championship. He went 
on to serve as the university’s athletic director, where he built 
one of the most impressive athletics programs in the country.
We asked Coach Dooley how players go about mastering 
all the complexities of the game. His theories of coaching and 

Mix Up Your Practice ê 61
training revolve around the weekly cycle of one Saturday game 
to the next. In that short period there’s a lot to learn: studying 
the opposition’s type of game in the classroom, discussing 
offensive and defensive strategies for opposing it, taking the 
discussion onto the playing fi eld, breaking the strategies down 
to the movements of individual positions and trying them out, 
knitting the parts into a  whole, and then repeating the moves 
until they run like clockwork.
While all this is going on, the players must also keep their 
fundamental skills in top form: blocking, tackling, catching 
the ball, bringing the ball in, carry ing the ball. Dooley be-
lieves that (1) you have to keep practicing the fundamentals 
from time to time, forever, so you keep them sharp, other-
wise you’re cooked, but (2) you need to change it up in prac-
tice because too much repetition is boring. The position 
coaches work with players individually on specifi c skills and 
then on how they’re playing their positions during team 
practice.
What  else? There’s practicing the kicking game. There’s the 
matter of each player’s mastery of the playbook. And there 
are the special plays from the team’s repertoire that often 
make the difference between winning and losing. In Dooley’s 
narrative, the special plays stand as exemplars of spaced learn-
ing: they’re practiced only on Thursdays, so there’s always 
a week between sessions, and the plays are run in a varied 
sequence.
With all this to be done, it’s not surprising that a critical 
aspect of the team’s success is a very specifi c daily and weekly 
schedule that interleaves the elements of individual and team 
practice. The start of every day’s practice is strictly focused on 
the fundamentals of each player’s position. Next, players prac-
tice in small groups, working on maneuvers involving several 
positions. These parts are gradually brought together and run 

Make It Stick ê 62
as a team. Play is speeded up and slowed down, rehearsed 
mentally as well as physically. By midweek the team is run-
ning the plays in real time, full speed.
“You’re coming at it fast, and you’ve got to react fast,” 
Dooley said. “But as you get closer to game time, you slow it 
down again. Now it’s a kind of rehearsal without physical 
contact. The play basically starts out the same each time, but 
then what the opponent does changes it. So you’ve got to be 
able to adjust to that. You start into the motion and say, ‘If 
they react like this, then this is what you would do.’ You prac-
tice adjustments. If you do it enough times in different situa-
tions, then you’re able to do it pretty well in what ever comes 
up on the fi eld.”11
How does a player get on top of his playbook? He takes 
it home and goes over the plays in his mind. He may walk 
through them. Everything in practice  can’t be physically stren-
uous, Dooley said, or you’d wear yourself out, “so if the play 
calls for you to step this way and then go the other way, you 
can rehearse that in your mind, maybe just lean your body as 
if to go that way. And then if something happens where you 
have to adjust, you can do that mentally. By reading the play-
book, rehearsing it in your mind, maybe taking a step or two 
to walk through it, you simulate something happening. So 
that kind of rehearsal is added to what you get in the class-
room and on the fi eld.”
The fi nal quarterback meetings are held on Saturday morn-
ing, reviewing the game plan and running through it mentally. 
The offensive coaches can make all the plans they want to 
about the hypothetical game, but once play gets under way, 
the execution rests in the hands of the quarterback.
For Coach Dooley’s team, it’s all there: retrieval, spacing, 
interleaving, variation, refl ection, and elaboration. The sea-
soned quarterback going into Saturday’s game— mentally run-

Mix Up Your Practice ê 63
ning through the plays, the reactions, the adjustments— is 
doing the same thing as the seasoned neurosurgeon who’s re-
hearsing what’s about to unfold in the operating room.
The Takeaway
Here’s a quick rundown of what we know today about massed 
practice and its alternatives. Scientists will continue to deepen 
our understanding.
We harbor deep convictions that we learn better through 
single- minded focus and dogged repetition, and these beliefs 
are validated time and again by the visible improvement that 
comes during “practice- practice- practice.” But scientists call 
this heightened per for mance during the acquisition phase of a 
skill “momentary strength” and distinguish it from “underlying 
habit strength.” The very techniques that build habit strength, 
like spacing, interleaving, and variation, slow visible acquisi-
tion and fail to deliver the improvement during practice that 
helps to motivate and reinforce our efforts.12
Cramming, a form of massed practice, has been likened to 
binge- and- purge eating. A lot goes in, but most of it comes 
right back out in short order. The simple act of spacing out 
study and practice in installments and allowing time to elapse 
between them makes both the learning and the memory stron-
ger, in effect building habit strength.
How big an interval, you ask? The simple answer: enough 
so that practice  doesn’t become a mindless repetition. At a 
minimum, enough time so that a little forgetting has set in. A 
little forgetting between practice sessions can be a good thing, 
if it leads to more effort in practice, but you do not want so 
much forgetting that retrieval essentially involves relearning 
the material. The time periods between sessions of practice 
let memories consolidate. Sleep seems to play a large role in 

Make It Stick ê 64
memory consolidation, so practice with at least a day in be-
tween sessions is good.
Something as simple as a deck of fl ashcards can provide an 
example of spacing. Between repetitions of any individual 
card, you work through many others. The German scientist 
Sebastian Leitner developed his own system for spaced prac-
tice of fl ashcards, known as the Leitner box. Think of it as a 
series of four fi le- card boxes. In the fi rst are the study materi-
als (be they musical scores, hockey moves, or Spanish vocabu-
lary fl ashcards) that must be practiced frequently because you 
often make mistakes in them. In the second box are the cards 
you’re pretty good at, and that box gets practiced less often 
than the fi rst, perhaps by a half. The cards in the third box are 
practiced less often than those in the second, and so on. If you 
miss a question, make mistakes in the music, fl ub the one- 
touch pass, you move it up a box so you will practice it more 
often. The underlying idea is simply that the better your mas-
tery, the less frequent the practice, but if it’s important to retain, 
it will never disappear completely from your set of practice 
boxes.
Beware of the familiarity trap: the feeling that you know 
something and no longer need to practice it. This familiarity 
can hurt you during self- quizzing if you take shortcuts. Doug 
Larsen says, “You have to be disciplined to say, ‘All right, I’m 
going to make myself recall all of this and if I don’t, what did 
I miss, how did I not know that?’ Whereas if you have an 
instructor- generated test or quiz, suddenly you have to do it, 
there’s an expectation, you  can’t cheat, you  can’t take mental 
shortcuts around it, you simply have to do that.”
The nine quizzes Andy Sobel administers over the twenty- 
six meetings of his po liti cal economics course are a simple 
example of spaced retrieval practice, and of interleaving— 
because he rolls forward into each successive quiz questions 
pertaining to work from the beginning of the semester.

Mix Up Your Practice ê 65
Interleaving two or more subjects during practice also pro-
vides a form of spacing. Interleaving can also help you develop 
your ability to discriminate later between different kinds of 
problems and select the right tool from your growing toolkit 
of solutions.
In interleaving, you don’t move from a complete practice 
set of one topic to go to another. You switch before each prac-
tice is complete. A friend of ours describes his own experience 
with this: “I go to a hockey class and  we’re learning skating 
skills, puck handling, shooting, and I notice that I get frus-
trated because we do a little bit of skating and just when I 
think I’m getting it, we go to stick handling, and I go home 
frustrated, saying, ‘Why  doesn’t this guy keep letting us do 
these things until we get it?’ ” This is actually the rare coach 
who understands that it’s more effective to distribute practice 
across these different skills than polish each one in turn. The 
athlete gets frustrated because the learning’s not proceeding 
quickly, but the next week he will be better at all aspects, the 
skating, the stick handling, and so on, than if he’d dedicated 
each session to polishing one skill.
Like interleaving, varied practice helps learners build a 
broad schema, an ability to assess changing conditions and 
adjust responses to fi t. Arguably, interleaving and variation 
help learners reach beyond memorization to higher levels of 
conceptual learning and application, building more rounded, 
deep, and durable learning, what in motor skills shows up as 
underlying habit strength.
Something the researchers call “blocked practice” is easily 
mistaken for varied practice. It’s like the old LP rec ords that 
could only play their songs in the same sequence. In blocked 
practice, which is commonly (but not only) found in sports, a 
drill is run over and over. The player moves from one station 
to the next, performing a different maneuver at each station. 
That’s how the LA Kings  were practicing their one- touch pass 

Make It Stick ê 66
before they got religion and started changing it up. It would 
be like always practicing fl ashcards in the same order. You 
need to shuffl e your fl ashcards. If you always practice the 
same skill in the same way, from the same place on the ice or 
fi eld, in the same set of math problems, or during the same 
sequence in a fl ight simulator, you’re starving your learning 
on short rations of variety.
Spacing, interleaving, and variability are natural features of 
how we conduct our lives. Every patient visit or football game 
is a test and an exercise in retrieval practice. Every routine traf-
fi c stop is a test for a cop. And every traffi c stop is different, 
adding to a cop’s explicit and implicit memory and, if she pays 
attention, making her more effective in the future. The com-
mon term is “learning from experience.” Some people never 
seem to learn. One difference, perhaps, between those who 
do and don’t is whether they have cultivated the habit of re-
fl ection. Refl ection is a form of retrieval practice (What hap-
pened? What did I do? How did it work out?), enhanced with 
elaboration (What would I do differently next time?).
As Doug Larsen reminds us, the connections between the 
neurons in the brain are very plastic. “Making the brain work 
is actually what seems to make a difference— bringing in more 
complex networks, then using those circuits repeatedly, which 
makes them more robust.”

67
When Mia Blundetto, age twenty- three, 
fi rst lieutenant, U.S. Marine Corps, was billeted to logistics in 
Okinawa, she had to get her ticket punched at jump school. 
Describing that moment two years later, she said, “I hate fall-
ing, that feeling in your chest. There’s not a day in my life I 
wanted to jump out of an airplane. I  wouldn’t even go down 
a water slide until I was in middle school. But I was in charge 
of a platoon of Marines who rigged parachutes and jumped 
out of airplanes and dropped cargo. It’s one of the most sought- 
out billets as a logistics offi cer, very hard to get. My command-
ing offi cer said, you know, ‘You will be air delivery platoon 
commander. If you don’t want to do that, I’ll put you some-
where  else and we’ll let the next guy have that job.’ There’s no 
way I could let somebody  else have this job that everybody 
wanted. So I looked him straight in the face and said, ‘Yes, sir, 
I’ll jump out of planes.’ ”1
4
Embrace Diﬃ  culties

Make It Stick ê 68
Mia is fi ve feet seven inches of blonde ambition. Her father, 
Frank, ex- marine, is in awe. “She’ll do more pull- ups than most 
of the guys in her class. She has the Mary land state record in 
the bench press, she was sixth in the NCAA for powerlifting. 
Very soft- spoken; you just don’t see it coming.” When we had 
Mia to ourselves, we asked her if Frank was blowing smoke. 
She laughed. “He likes to exaggerate.” But when pressed, she 
admitted to the facts. Until recently, women in the Marines 
 were required to do fl ex arm hangs instead of pull- ups (where 
the chin crosses the plane of the pull- up bar), but the newly 
toughened rules effective in 2014 require a minimum of three 
pull- ups, the same as the minimum for men. Targets are eight 
pull- ups for women, twenty for men. Mia does thirteen and is 
shooting for twenty. As a student at the Naval Academy, she 
qualifi ed two years in a row for nationals in powerlifting— 
three sets each of bench press, squats, and dead lifts— setting 
Mary land state rec ords.
So we know she’s tough. An aversion to falling is an in-
stinctual refl ex for self- preservation, but her decision to take 
the assignment was a foregone conclusion, the kind of grit the 
Marines and the Blundettos are known for. Mia has a sister 
and two brothers. They’re all active duty Marines.
As it turned out, the third time Mia threw herself out the 
jump door of a C130 troop transport at 1,250 feet, she plum-
meted right onto another soldier’s infl ated parachute. But  we’re 
getting ahead of the story.
 We’re interested in her jump school training because it’s a 
great example of how some diffi culties that elicit more effort 
and that slow down learning— spacing, interleaving, mixing 
up practice, and others— will more than compensate for their 
incon ve nience by making the learning stronger, more precise, 
and more enduring. Short- term impediments that make for 
stronger learning have come to be called desirable diffi culties, 

Embrace Difficulties ê 69
a term coined by the psychologists Elizabeth and Robert 
Bjork.2
The army’s jump school at Fort Benning, Georgia, is designed 
to make sure you get it right and get it done, and it’s a model 
of learning through desirable diffi culty. You are not allowed 
to carry a notebook and write notes. You listen, watch, re-
hearse, and execute. Jump school is a place where testing is the 
principal instructional medium, and the test is in the doing. 
And, like all things military, jump school adheres to a strict 
protocol. Get it right or get the boot.
The parachute landing fall, or PLF in military parlance, is a 
technique of hitting the ground and rolling in a way that dis-
tributes the impact over the balls of your feet, the side of your 
calf, the side of your thigh, the side of your hip, and the side 
of your back. There are six possible directions in which to 
execute the fall along the length of your body, determined by 
conditions in the moment such as the direction of your drift, 
the terrain, wind, and whether you’re oscillating as you ap-
proach the ground. In your fi rst exposure to this essential skill 
of parachuting, you stand in a gravel pit where the PLF is ex-
plained and demonstrated. Then you try it: you practice falling 
along different planes of the body, you get corrective feedback, 
and you practice it again.
Over the ensuing week the diffi culty is notched up. You 
stand on a platform two feet off the ground. On the command 
“Ready,” you rock up on the balls of your feet, feet and knees 
together, arms skyward. On the command “land,” you jump 
off the wall and execute your PLF.
The test becomes more diffi cult. You clip yourself onto a 
zip line a dozen feet off the ground, grab onto an overhead 
T-bar, and drift down to a landing site, where, on command, 

Make It Stick ê 70
you release and execute the PLF. You practice falling to the 
right and left, forward and backward, mixing it up.
The diffi culty is increased again. You climb to a platform 
twelve feet off the ground, where you practice strapping on 
your harness, checking gear using the buddy system, and jump-
ing through a mockup of an airplane jump door. The harness 
has risers like those from a parachute, hooked to a zip line 
but allowing for the same long arc of suspension, and when 
you jump, you have the momentary downward sensation of 
free fall, followed by the broad oscillations of suspension as 
you move along the cable, getting familiar with the motions 
of a real jump. But at the bottom it’s the instructor, not you, 
who pulls the release and drops you the last two or three feet 
to earth, so now you’re executing your fall randomly, from all 
directions, simulating what’s to come.
Next, you climb a thirty- four- foot tower to practice all the 
elements of a jump and the choreography of a mass exit from 
the aircraft, learning how it feels to fall from a height, how to 
deal with equipment malfunctions, how to jump with a load 
of heavy combat equipment.
Through demonstration and simulation, in escalating lev-
els of diffi culty that must be mastered in order to progress 
from one to the next, you learn how to board the aircraft as a 
part of a jump crew and participate in the command sequence 
of thirty troops positioning for a mass exit over a drop zone. 
How to get out the jump door correctly, how to count one- 
thousand, two- thousand, three- thousand, four- thousand and 
feel your chute deploy, or if you get to six- thousand, to pull 
the cord on your reserve chute; how to deal with twisted sus-
pension lines, avoid collisions, hold into the wind, sort out a 
tangled control line; how to avoid stealing air from another 
jumper; the contingencies for landing in trees, water, or power 

Embrace Difficulties ê 71
lines; how to jump by day or night, in different wind and 
weather.
The knowledge and skills to be acquired are many, and 
practice is spaced and interleaved, both by default, as you wait 
your turn at each of the staging areas, airplane mock- ups, 
jump platforms, and harness mechanisms, and by necessity, in 
order to cover all that must be mastered and integrate the 
disparate components. Finally, if you make it to week 3 with-
out washing out, you jump for real, making fi ve exits from a 
military transport. With successful completion of the training 
and fi ve successful jumps, you earn your jump wings and Air-
borne certifi cate.
On Mia’s third jump, she was fi rst in line at the port jump 
door with fourteen jumpers queued behind her and another 
fourteen queued behind the guy standing at the opposite door. 
“So what the fi rst person does, in this case me, you hand off 
your static line to the Sergeant Airborne, and there’s a light 
and it’s red or green, and you get the one- minute warning, 
then the thirty- second warning. I’m standing at this door for 
a few minutes and it’s beautiful. It’s probably one of the pretti-
est things I’ve ever seen, but I was terrifi ed. There was nothing 
to get in my way, nothing I had to think about except just wait-
ing, waiting for the ‘Go!’ The guy at the other door went, then 
I jumped, and I’m counting one- thousand, two- thousand—and 
suddenly, at four thousand, I had a green parachute wrapped 
all around me! I’m thinking, There’s no way this can be my 
parachute! I’d felt my chute open, I’d felt that lift. I realized 
that I was on top of the fi rst jumper, so I just sort of swam out 
of his parachute and steered away from him.”
Jumpers are staggered, but in the four turbulent seconds 
until your chute opens you have neither awareness nor control 
over your proximity to other jumpers. The incident, which 

Make It Stick ê 72
amounted to nothing, thanks to her training, is telling none-
theless. Had it frightened her? Not at all, she said. Mia was 
prepared to handle it, and her confi dence gave her the cool to 
“just sort of swim out.”
It’s one thing to feel confi dent of your knowledge; it’s some-
thing  else to demonstrate mastery. Testing is not only a power-
ful learning strategy, it is a potent reality check on the accuracy 
of your own judgment of what you know how to do. When 
confi dence is based on repeated per for mance, demonstrated 
through testing that simulates real- world conditions, you can 
lean into it. Facing the jump door may always reawaken feel-
ings of terror, but the moment she’s out, Mia says, the fear 
evaporates.
How Learning Occurs
To help you understand how diffi culty can be desirable, we’ll 
briefl y describe  here how learning occurs.
Encoding
Let’s imagine you’re Mia, standing in a gravel pit watching a 
jump instructor explain and demonstrate the parachute land-
ing fall. The brain converts your perceptions into chemical 
and electrical changes that form a mental repre sen ta tion of 
the patterns you’ve observed. This pro cess of converting sen-
sory perceptions into meaningful repre sen ta tions in the brain 
is still not perfectly understood. We call the pro cess encoding, 
and we call the new repre sen ta tions within the brain memory 
traces. Think of notes jotted or sketched on a scratchpad, our 
short- term memory.
Much of how we run our day- to- day lives is guided by the 
ephemera that clutter our short- term memory and are, fortu-
nately, soon forgotten— how to jigger the broken latch on the 

Embrace Difficulties ê 73
locker you used when you suited up at the gym today; re-
membering to stop for an oil change after your workout. But 
the experiences and learning that we want to salt away for the 
future must be made stronger and more durable— in Mia’s 
case, the distinctive moves that will enable her to hit the ground 
without breaking an ankle, or worse.3
Consolidation
The pro cess of strengthening these mental repre sen ta tions for 
long- term memory is called consolidation. New learning is 
labile: its meaning is not fully formed and therefore is easily 
altered. In consolidation, the brain reorganizes and stabilizes 
the memory traces. This may occur over several hours or lon-
ger and involves deep pro cessing of the new material, during 
which scientists believe that the brain replays or rehearses the 
learning, giving it meaning, fi lling in blank spots, and making 
connections to past experiences and to other knowledge al-
ready stored in long- term memory. Prior knowledge is a pre-
requisite for making sense of new learning, and forming those 
connections is an important task of consolidation. Mia’s con-
siderable athletic skills, physical self- awareness, and prior ex-
perience represent a large body of knowledge to which the 
elements of a successful PLF would fi nd many connections. As 
 we’ve noted, sleep seems to help memory consolidation, but 
in any case, consolidation and transition of learning to long- 
term storage occurs over a period of time.
An apt analogy for how the brain consolidates new learn-
ing may be the experience of composing an essay. The fi rst 
draft is rangy, imprecise. You discover what you want to say 
by trying to write it. After a couple of revisions you have sharp-
ened the piece and cut away some of the extraneous points. 
You put it aside to let it ferment. When you pick it up again 

Make It Stick ê 74
a day or two later, what you want to say has become clearer 
in your mind. Perhaps you now perceive that there are three 
main points you are making. You connect them to examples 
and supporting information familiar to your audience. You 
rearrange and draw together the elements of your argument 
to make it more effective and elegant.
Similarly, the pro cess of learning something often starts out 
feeling disor ga nized and unwieldy; the most important aspects 
are not always salient. Consolidation helps or ga nize and solid-
ify learning, and, notably, so does retrieval after a lapse of some 
time, because the act of retrieving a memory from long- term 
storage can both strengthen the memory traces and at the same 
time make them modifi able again, enabling them, for example, 
to connect to more recent learning. This pro cess is called recon-
solidation. This is how retrieval practice modifi es and strength-
ens learning.
Suppose that on day 2 of jump school, you’re put on the 
spot to execute your parachute landing fall and you struggle 
to recall the correct posture and compose yourself— feet and 
knees together, knees slightly bent, eyes on the horizon— but 
in the refl ex to break your fall you throw your arm out, for-
getting to pull your elbows tight to your sides. You could have 
broken the arm or dislocated your shoulder if this  were the 
real deal. This effort to reconstruct what you learned the day 
before is ragged, but in making it, critical elements of the ma-
neuver come clearer and are reconsolidated for stronger mem-
ory. If you’re practicing something over and over in rapid- fi re 
fashion, whether it’s your parachute landing fall or the conju-
gation of foreign verbs, you’re leaning on short- term memory, 
and very little mental effort is required. You show gratifying 
improvement rather quickly, but you  haven’t done much to 
strengthen the underlying repre sen ta tion of those skills. Your 
per for mance in the moment is not an indication of durable 

Embrace Difficulties ê 75
learning. On the other hand, when you let the memory recede 
a little, for example by spacing or interleaving the practice, 
retrieval is harder, your per for mance is less accomplished, and 
you feel let down, but your learning is deeper and you will 
retrieve it more easily in the future.4
Retrieval
Learning, remembering, and forgetting work together in in-
teresting ways. Durable, robust learning requires that we do 
two things. First, as we recode and consolidate new material 
from short- term memory into long- term memory, we must 
anchor it there securely. Second, we must associate the mate-
rial with a diverse set of cues that will make us adept at recall-
ing the knowledge later. Having effective retrieval cues is an 
aspect of learning that often goes overlooked. The task is 
more than committing knowledge to memory. Being able to 
retrieve it when we need it is just as important.
The reason we don’t remember how to tie knots even af-
ter  we’ve been taught is because we don’t practice and apply 
what  we’ve learned. Say you’re in the city park one day and 
come across an Ea gle Scout teaching knots. On a whim you 
take an hour’s lesson. He demonstrates eight or ten specimens, 
explains what each is useful for, has you practice tying them, 
and sends you away with a short length of rope and a cheat 
sheet. You head home committed to learning these knots, but 
life is full, and you fail to practice them. They are soon forgot-
ten, and this story could end there, with no learning. But then, 
as it happens, the following spring you buy a small fi shing 
boat, and you want to attach an anchor on a line. With rope 
in hand and feeling mildly stumped, you recall from your les-
son that there was a knot for putting a loop in the end of a 
line. You are now practicing retrieval. You fi nd your cheat 

Make It Stick ê 76
sheet and relearn how to tie a bowline. You put a small loop 
in the rope and then take the short end and draw it through, 
silently reciting the little memory device you  were given: the 
rabbit comes up from his hole, goes around the tree, and goes 
back down. Retrieval again. A little snugging- up, and there 
you have your knot, a dandy piece of scoutcraft of the kind 
you’d always fancied knowing. Later, you put a piece of rope 
beside the chair where you watch TV and practice the bow-
line during commercials. You are doing spaced practice. Over 
the coming weeks you’re surprised at how many little jobs are 
easier if you have a piece of rope with a loop in the end. More 
spaced practice. By August you have discovered every possi-
ble use and purpose in your life for the bowline knot.
Knowledge, skills, and experiences that are vivid and hold 
signifi cance, and those that are periodically practiced, stay with 
us. If you know you’re soon to throw yourself out of a troop 
transport, you listen up good when they’re telling you when 
and how to pull the rip cord on your reserve chute, or what 
can go wrong at twelve hundred feet and how to “just sort of 
swim out of it.” The mental rehearsal you conduct while lying 
in your bunk too tired to sleep and wishing the next day was 
already over and well- jumped is a form of spaced practice, 
and that helps you, too.
Extending Learning: Updating Retrieval Cues
There’s virtually no limit to how much learning we can re-
member as long as we relate it to what we already know. In 
fact, because new learning depends on prior learning, the more 
we learn, the more possible connections we create for further 
learning. Our retrieval capacity, though, is severely limited. 
Most of what  we’ve learned is not accessible to us at any given 
moment. This limitation on retrieval is helpful to us: if every 

Embrace Difficulties ê 77
memory  were always readily to hand, you would have a hard 
time sorting through the sheer volume of material to put your 
fi nger on the knowledge you need at the moment: where did 
I put my hat, how do I sync my electronic devices, what goes 
into a perfect brandy Manhattan?
Knowledge is more durable if it’s deeply entrenched, mean-
ing that you have fi rmly and thoroughly comprehended a 
concept, it has practical importance or keen emotional weight 
in your life, and it is connected with other knowledge that 
you hold in memory. How readily you can recall knowledge 
from your internal archives is determined by context, by recent 
use, and by the number and vividness of cues that you have 
linked to the knowledge and can call on to help bring it forth.5
Here’s the tricky part. As you go through life, you often 
need to forget cues associated with older, competing memo-
ries so as to associate them successfully with new ones. To 
learn Italian in middle age, you may have to forget your high 
school French, because every time you think “to be” and hope 
to come up with the Italian essere, up pops etre, despite your 
most earnest intentions. Traveling in En gland, you have to 
suppress your cues to drive on the right side of the road so 
you can establish reliable cues to stay on the left. Knowledge 
that is well entrenched, like real fl uency in French or years of 
experience driving on the right side of the road, is easily re-
learned later, after a period of disuse or after being interrupted 
by competition for retrieval cues. It’s not the knowledge itself 
that has been forgotten, but the cues that enable you to fi nd 
and retrieve it. The cues for the new learning, driving on the 
left, displace those for the old, driving on the right (if we are 
lucky).
The paradox is that some forgetting is often essential for 
new learning.6 When you change from a PC to a Mac, or from 
one Windows platform to another, you have to do enormous 

Make It Stick ê 78
forgetting in order to learn the architecture of the new system 
and become adept at manipulating it so readily that your at-
tention can focus on doing your work and not on working the 
machine. Jump school training provides another example: 
After their military ser vice, many paratroopers take an inter-
est in smoke jumping. Smokejumpers use different airplanes, 
different equipment, and different jump protocols. Having 
trained at the army’s jump school is cited as a distinct disad-
vantage for smoke jumping, because you have to unlearn one 
set of procedures that you have practiced to the point of re-
fl ex and replace them with another. Even in cases where both 
bodies of learning seem so similar to the uninitiated— jumping 
out of an airplane with a parachute on your back— you may 
have to forget the cues to a complex body of learning that you 
possess if you are to acquire a new one.
We know this problem of reassigning cues to memory from 
our own lives, even on the simplest levels. When our friend 
Jack fi rst takes up with Joan, we sometimes call the couple 
“Jack and Jill,” as the cue “Jack and” pulls up the old nursery 
rhyme that’s so thoroughly embedded in memory. About the 
time we have “Jack and” reliably cuing “Joan,” alas, Joan 
throws him over, and he takes up with Jenny. Good grief! 
Half of the time that we mean to say Jack and Jenny we catch 
ourselves saying Jack and Joan. It would have been easier had 
Jack picked up with Katie, so that the trailing K sound in his 
name handed us off to the initiating K in hers, but no such 
luck. Alliteration can be a handy cue, or a subversive one. In 
all of this turmoil you don’t forget Jill, Joan, or Jenny, but you 
“repurpose” your cues so that you can keep pace with the 
changing opera of Jack’s life.7
It is a critical point that as you learn new things, you don’t 
lose from long- term memory most of what you have learned 
well in life; rather, through disuse or the reassignment of cues, 

Embrace Difficulties ê 79
you forget it in the sense that you’re unable to call it up easily. 
For example, if you’ve moved several times, you may not be 
able to recall a previous address from twenty years ago. But if 
you are given a multiple choice test for the address, you can 
probably pick it out easily, for it still abides, as it  were, in the 
uncleaned closet of your mind. If you have ever immersed 
yourself in writing stories of your past, picturing the people 
and places of earlier days, you may have been surprised by the 
memories that started fl ooding back, things long forgotten 
now coming to mind. Context can unleash memories, as when 
the right key works to open an old lock. In Marcel Proust’s 
Remembrance of Things Past, the narrator grieves over his 
inability to recall the days of his adolescence in the French 
village of his aunt and uncle, until one day the taste of a cake 
dipped in lime blossom tea brings it all rushing back, all the 
people and events he thought had long since been lost to time. 
Most people have experiences like Proust’s when a sight or 
sound or smell brings back a memory in full force, even some 
episode you have not thought about in years.8
Easier Isn’t Better
Psychologists have uncovered a curious inverse relationship 
between the ease of retrieval practice and the power of that 
practice to entrench learning: the easier knowledge or a skill 
is for you to retrieve, the less your retrieval practice will ben-
efi t your retention of it. Conversely, the more effort you have 
to expend to retrieve knowledge or skill, the more the practice 
of retrieval will entrench it.
Not long ago the California Polytechnic State University 
baseball team, in San Luis Obispo, became involved in an in-
teresting experiment in improving their batting skills. They  were 
all highly experienced players, adept at making solid contact 

Make It Stick ê 80
with the ball, but they agreed to take extra batting practice 
twice a week, following two different practice regimens, to 
see which type of practice produced better results.
Hitting a baseball is one of the hardest skills in sports. It 
takes less than half a second for a ball to reach home plate. In 
this instant, the batter must execute a complex combination 
of perceptual, cognitive, and motor skills: determining the 
type of pitch, anticipating how the ball will move, and aiming 
and timing the swing to arrive at the same place and moment 
as the ball. This chain of perceptions and responses must be so 
deeply entrenched as to become automatic, because the ball is 
in the catcher’s mitt long before you can even begin to think 
your way through how to connect with it.
Part of the Cal Poly team practiced in the standard way. 
They practiced hitting forty- fi ve pitches, evenly divided into 
three sets. Each set consisted of one type of pitch thrown 
fi fteen times. For example, the fi rst set would be fi fteen fast-
balls, the second set fi fteen curveballs, and the third set fi f-
teen changeups. This was a form of massed practice. For each 
set of 15 pitches, as the batter saw more of that type, he got 
gratifyingly better at anticipating the balls, timing his swings, 
and connecting. Learning seemed easy.
The rest of the team  were given a more diffi cult practice 
regimen: the three types of pitches  were randomly interspersed 
across the block of forty- fi ve throws. For each pitch, the bat-
ter had no idea which type to expect. At the end of the forty- 
fi ve swings, he was still struggling somewhat to connect with 
the ball. These players didn’t seem to be developing the profi -
ciency their teammates  were showing. The interleaving and 
spacing of different pitches made learning more arduous and 
feel slower.
The extra practice sessions continued twice weekly for six 
weeks. At the end, when the players’ hitting was assessed, the 

Embrace Difficulties ê 81
two groups had clearly benefi ted differently from the extra 
practice, and not in the way the players expected. Those who 
had practiced on the randomly interspersed pitches now 
displayed markedly better hitting relative to those who had 
practiced on one type of pitch thrown over and over. These 
results are all the more interesting when you consider that 
these players  were already skilled hitters prior to the extra 
training. Bringing their per for mance to an even higher level is 
good evidence of a training regimen’s effectiveness.
Here again we see the two familiar lessons. First, that some 
diffi culties that require more effort and slow down apparent 
gains— like spacing, interleaving, and mixing up practice— 
will feel less productive at the time but will more than com-
pensate for that by making the learning stronger, precise, and 
enduring. Second, that our judgments of what learning strate-
gies work best for us are often mistaken, colored by illusions 
of mastery.
When the baseball players at Cal Poly practiced curveball 
after curveball over fi fteen pitches, it became easier for them to 
remember the perceptions and responses they needed for that 
type of pitch: the look of the ball’s spin, how the ball changed 
direction, how fast its direction changed, and how long to wait 
for it to curve. Per for mance improved, but the growing ease of 
recalling these perceptions and responses led to little durable 
learning. It is one skill to hit a curveball when you know a 
curveball will be thrown; it is a different skill to hit a curveball 
when you don’t know it’s coming. Baseball players need to 
build the latter skill, but they often practice the former, which, 
being a form of massed practice, builds per for mance gains on 
short- term memory. It was more challenging for the Cal Poly 
batters to retrieve the necessary skills when practice involved 
random pitches. Meeting that challenge made the per for mance 
gains painfully slow but also long lasting.

Make It Stick ê 82
This paradox is at the heart of the concept of desirable 
diffi culties in learning: the more effort required to retrieve 
(or, in effect, relearn) something, the better you learn it. In 
other words, the more you’ve forgotten about a topic, the 
more effective relearning will be in shaping your permanent 
knowledge.9
How Effort Helps
Reconsolidating Memory
Effortful recall of learning, as happens in spaced practice, re-
quires that you “reload” or reconstruct the components of the 
skill or material anew from long- term memory rather than 
mindlessly repeating them from short- term memory.10 During 
this focused, effortful recall, the learning is made pliable again: 
the most salient aspects of it become clearer, and the conse-
quent reconsolidation helps to reinforce meaning, strengthen 
connections to prior knowledge, bolster the cues and retrieval 
routes for recalling it later, and weaken competing routes. 
Spaced practice, which allows some forgetting to occur be-
tween sessions, strengthens both the learning and the cues 
and routes for fast retrieval when that learning is needed 
again, as when the pitcher tries to surprise the batter with a 
curveball after pitching several fastballs. The more effort that 
is required to recall a memory or to execute a skill, provided 
that the effort succeeds, the more the act of recalling or exe-
cuting benefi ts the learning.11
Massed practice gives us the warm sensation of mastery 
because  we’re looping information through short- term mem-
ory without having to reconstruct the learning from long- 
term memory. But just as with rereading as a study strategy, 
the fl uency gained through massed practice is transitory, and 
our sense of mastery is illusory. It’s the effortful pro cess of 

Embrace Difficulties ê 83
reconstructing the knowledge that triggers reconsolidation 
and deeper learning.
Creating Mental Models
With enough effortful practice, a complex set of interrelated 
ideas or a sequence of motor skills fuse into a meaningful 
 whole, forming a mental model somewhat akin to a “brain 
app”. Learning to drive a car involves a host of simultaneous 
actions that require all of our powers of concentration and 
dexterity while we are learning them. But over time, these 
combinations of cognition and motor skills— for example, 
the perceptions and maneuvers required to parallel park or 
manipulate a stick shift— become ingrained as sets of mental 
models associated with driving. Mental models are forms of 
deeply entrenched and highly effi cient skills (seeing and un-
loading on a curveball) or knowledge structures (a memo-
rized sequence of chess moves) that, like habits, can be adapted 
and applied in varied circumstances. Expert per for mance is 
built through thousands of hours of practice in your area of 
expertise, in varying conditions, through which you accumu-
late a vast library of such mental models that enables you to 
correctly discern a given situation and instantaneously select 
and execute the correct response.
Broadening Mastery
Retrieval practice that you perform at different times and in 
different contexts and that interleaves different learning ma-
terial has the benefi t of linking new associations to the mate-
rial. This pro cess builds interconnected networks of knowl-
edge that bolster and support mastery of your fi eld. It also 
multiplies the cues for retrieving the knowledge, increasing 
the versatility with which you can later apply it.

Make It Stick ê 84
Think of an experienced chef who has internalized the 
complex knowledge of how fl avors and textures interact; how 
ingredients change form under heat; the differing effects to be 
achieved with a saucepan versus a wok, with copper versus 
cast iron. Think of the fl y fi sher who can sense the presence of 
trout and accurately judge the likely species, make the right 
choice of dry fl y, nymph, or streamer, judge the wind, and 
know how and where to drop that fl y to make the trout rise. 
Think of the kid on the BMX bike who can perform bunny-
hops, tail whips, 180s, and wall taps off the features of an 
unfamiliar streetscape. Interleaving and variation mix up the 
contexts of practice and the other skills and knowledge with 
which the new material is associated. This makes our mental 
models more versatile, enabling us to apply our learning to a 
broader range of situations.
Fostering Conceptual Learning
How do humans learn concepts, for example the difference 
between dogs and cats? By randomly coming across dissimi-
lar examples— Chihuahuas, tabby cats, Great Danes, picture 
book lions, calico cats, Welsh terriers. Spaced and interleaved 
exposure characterizes most of humans’ normal experience. 
It’s a good way to learn, because this type of exposure strength-
ens the skills of discrimination— the pro cess of noticing par-
ticulars (a turtle comes up for air but a fi sh  doesn’t)— and of 
induction: surmising the general rule (fi sh can breathe in wa-
ter). Recall the interleaved study of birds in one case, and of 
paintings in another, that helped learners distinguish between 
bird types or the works of different paint ers while at the same 
time learning to identify underlying commonalities of the 
examples within a species or an artist’s body of work. When 
asked about their preferences and beliefs, the learners thought 

Embrace Difficulties ê 85
that the experience of studying multiple examples of one spe-
cies of bird before studying examples of another species re-
sulted in better learning. But the interleaved strategy, which 
was more diffi cult and felt clunky, produced superior discrimi-
nation of differences between types, without hindering the 
ability to learn commonalities within a type. As was true for 
the baseball players’ batting practice, interleaving produced 
diffi culty in retrieving past examples of a par tic u lar species, 
which further solidifi ed the learning of which birds are repre-
sentative of a par tic u lar species.
The diffi culty produced by interleaving provides a second 
type of boost to learning. Interleaved practice of related but 
dissimilar geometric solids requires that you notice similari-
ties and differences in order to select the correct formula for 
computing the volume. It’s thought that this heightened sensi-
tivity to similarities and differences during interleaved prac-
tice leads to the encoding of more complex and nuanced 
repre sen ta tions of the study material— a better understanding 
of how specimens or types of problems are distinctive and 
why they call for a different interpretation or solution. Why a 
northern pike will strike a spoon or a crankbait, say, but a 
bass will happily powder his nose until you see fi t to throw 
him a grub or a popper.12
Improving Versatility
The retrieval diffi culties posed by spacing, interleaving, and 
variation are overcome by invoking the same mental pro-
cesses that will be needed later in applying the learning in ev-
eryday settings. By mimicking the challenges of practical ex-
perience, these learning strategies conform to the admonition 
to “practice like you play, and you’ll play like you practice,” 
improving what scientists call transfer of learning, which is 

Make It Stick ê 86
the ability to apply what you’ve learned in new settings. In the 
Cal Poly batting practice experiment, the act of overcoming 
the diffi culties posed by random types of pitches built a 
broader “vocabulary” of mental pro cesses for discerning the 
nature of the challenge (e.g., what the pitcher is throwing) 
and selecting among possible responses than did the narrower 
mental pro cesses suffi cient for excelling during massed, non-
varied experience. Recall the grade school students who proved 
more adept at tossing beanbags into three- foot baskets after 
having practiced tossing into two- and four- foot baskets, com-
pared to the students who only practiced tossing into three- 
foot basket. Recall the increasing diffi culty and complexity of 
the simulation training in jump school, or the cockpit simula-
tor of Matt Brown’s business jet.
Priming the Mind for Learning
When you’re asked to struggle with solving a problem before 
being shown how to solve it, the subsequent solution is better 
learned and more durably remembered. When you’ve bought 
your fi shing boat and are attempting to attach an anchor line, 
you’re far more likely to learn and remember the bowline knot 
than when you’re standing in a city park being shown the bow-
line by a Boy Scout who thinks you would lead a richer life if 
you had a handful of knots in your repertoire.
Other Learning Strategies That Incorporate 
Desirable Difﬁ culties
We usually think of interference as a detriment to learning, 
but certain kinds of interference can produce learning bene-
fi ts, and the positive effects are sometimes surprising. Would 
you rather read an article that has normal type or type that’s 
somewhat out of focus? Almost surely you would opt for the 

Embrace Difficulties ê 87
former. Yet when text on a page is slightly out of focus or 
presented in a font that is a little diffi cult to decipher, people 
recall the content better. Should the outline of a lecture follow 
the precise fl ow of a chapter in a textbook, or is it better if the 
lecture mismatches the text in some ways? It turns out that 
when the outline of a lecture proceeds in a different order from 
the textbook passage, the effort to discern the main ideas and 
reconcile the discrepancy produces better recall of the con-
tent. In another surprise, when letters are omitted from words 
in a text, requiring the reader to supply them, reading is slowed, 
and retention improves. In all of these examples, the change 
from normal pre sen ta tion introduces a diffi culty— disruption 
of fl uency— that makes the learner work harder to construct 
an interpretation that makes sense. The added effort increases 
comprehension and learning. (Of course, learning will not 
improve if the diffi culty completely obscures the meaning or 
cannot be overcome.)13
The act of trying to answer a question or attempting to solve 
a problem rather than being presented with the information 
or the solution is known as generation. Even if you’re being 
quizzed on material you’re familiar with, the simple act of fi ll-
ing in a blank has the effect of strengthening your memory of 
the material and your ability to recall it later. In testing, being 
required to supply an answer rather than select from multiple 
choice options often provides stronger learning benefi ts. Hav-
ing to write a short essay makes them stronger still. Overcom-
ing these mild diffi culties is a form of active learning, where 
students engage in higher- order thinking tasks rather than 
passively receiving knowledge conferred by others.
When you’re asked to supply an answer or a solution to 
something that’s new to you, the power of generation to aid 

Make It Stick ê 88
learning is even more evident. One explanation for this effect 
is the idea that as you cast about for a solution, retrieving re-
lated knowledge from memory, you strengthen the route to a 
gap in your learning even before the answer is provided to fi ll 
it and, when you do fi ll it, connections are made to the related 
material that is fresh in your mind from the effort. For ex-
ample, if you’re from Vermont and are asked to name the 
capital of Texas you might start ruminating on possibilities: 
Dallas? San Antonio? El Paso? Houston? Even if you’re un-
sure, thinking about alternatives before you hit on (or are 
given) the correct answer will help you. (Austin, of course.) 
Wrestling with the question, you rack your brain for some-
thing that might give you an idea. You may get curious, even 
stumped or frustrated and acutely aware of the hole in your 
knowledge that needs fi lling. When you’re then shown the so-
lution, a light goes on. Unsuccessful attempts to solve a prob-
lem encourage deep pro cessing of the answer when it is later 
supplied, creating fertile ground for its encoding, in a way 
that simply reading the answer cannot. It’s better to solve a 
problem than to memorize a solution. It’s better to attempt a 
solution and supply the incorrect answer than not to make 
the attempt.14
The act of taking a few minutes to review what has been 
learned from an experience (or in a recent class) and asking 
yourself questions is known as refl ection. After a lecture or 
reading assignment, for example, you might ask yourself: 
What are the key ideas? What are some examples? How do 
these relate to what I already know? Following an experience 
where you are practicing new knowledge or skills, you might 
ask: What went well? What could have gone better? What 

Embrace Difficulties ê 89
might I need to learn for better mastery, or what strategies 
might I use the next time to get better results?
Refl ection can involve several cognitive activities we have 
discussed that lead to stronger learning. These include re-
trieval (recalling recently learned knowledge to mind), elabo-
ration (for example, connecting new knowledge to what you 
already know), and generation (for example, rephrasing key 
ideas in your own words or visualizing and mentally rehears-
ing what you might do differently next time).
One form of refl ection that is gaining currency in class-
room settings is called “write to learn.” In essence, students 
refl ect on a recent class topic in a brief writing assignment, 
where they may express the main ideas in their own words 
and relate them to other concepts covered in class, or perhaps 
outside class. (For an example, read in Chapter 8 about the 
“learning paragraphs” Mary Pat Wenderoth assigns her stu-
dents in her human physiology course.) The learning benefi ts 
from the various cognitive activities that are engaged during 
refl ection (retrieval, elaboration, generation) have been well 
established through empirical studies.
An interesting recent study specifi cally examined “write to 
learn” as a learning tool. Over eight hundred college students 
in several introductory psychology classes listened to lectures 
throughout the semester. Following the pre sen ta tion of a key 
concept within a given lecture, the instructor asked students 
to write to learn. Students generated their own written sum-
maries of the key ideas, for example restating concepts in their 
own words and elaborating on the concepts by generating 
examples of them. For other key concepts presented during 
the lecture, students  were shown a set of slides summarizing 
the concepts and spent a few minutes copying down key ideas 
and examples verbatim from the slide.

Make It Stick ê 90
What was the result? On exams administered during the 
semester, the students  were asked questions that assessed their 
understanding of the key concepts that they had worked on 
learning. They scored signifi cantly (approximately half a let-
ter grade) better on the ones they had written about in their 
own words than on those they had copied, showing that it 
was not simply exposure to the concepts that produced the 
learning benefi t. In follow- up tests approximately two months 
later to mea sure retention, the benefi ts of writing to learn as a 
form of refl ection had dropped but remained robust.15
Failure and the Myth of Errorless Learning
In the 1950s and 1960s, the psychologist B. F. Skinner advo-
cated the adoption of “errorless learning” methods in educa-
tion in the belief that errors by learners are counterproductive 
and result from faulty instruction. The theory of errorless 
learning gave rise to instructional techniques in which learn-
ers  were spoonfed new material in small bites and immedi-
ately quizzed on them while they still remained on the tongue, 
so to speak, fresh in short- term memory and easily spit out 
onto the test form. There was virtually no chance of making 
an error. Since those days  we’ve come to understand that re-
trieval from short- term memory is an in effec tive learning 
strategy and that errors are an integral part of striving to in-
crease one’s mastery over new material. Yet in our Western 
culture, where achievement is seen as an indicator of ability, 
many learners view errors as failure and do what they can to 
avoid committing them. The aversion to failure may be rein-
forced by instructors who labor under the belief that when 
learners are allowed to make errors it’s the errors that they 
will learn.16
This is a misguided impulse. When learners commit errors 
and are given corrective feedback, the errors are not learned. 

Embrace Difficulties ê 91
Even strategies that are highly likely to result in errors, like 
asking someone to try to solve a problem before being shown 
how to do it, produce stronger learning and retention of the 
correct information than more passive learning strategies, pro-
vided there is corrective feedback. Moreover, people who are 
taught that learning is a struggle that often involves making 
errors will go on to exhibit a greater propensity to tackle 
tough challenges and will tend to see mistakes not as failures 
but as lessons and turning points along the path to mastery. 
To see the truth of this, look no further than the kid down the 
hall who is deeply absorbed in working his avatar up through 
the levels of an action game on his Xbox video console.
A fear of failure can poison learning by creating aversions 
to the kinds of experimentation and risk taking that charac-
terize striving, or by diminishing per for mance under pressure, 
as in a test setting. In the latter instance, students who have a 
high fear of making errors when taking tests may actually do 
worse on the test because of their anxiety. Why? It seems that 
a signifi cant portion of their working memory capacity is ex-
pended to monitor their per for mance (How am I doing? Am I 
making mistakes?), leaving less working memory capacity 
available to solve the problems posed by the test. “Working 
memory” refers to the amount of information you can hold in 
mind while working through a problem, especially in the face 
of distraction. Everyone’s working memory is severely limited, 
some more than others, and larger working memory capaci-
ties correlate with higher IQs.
To explore this theory about how fear of failure reduces 
test per for mance, sixth graders in France  were given very dif-
fi cult anagram problems that none of them could solve. After 
struggling unsuccessfully with the problems, half of the kids 
received a ten- minute lesson in which they  were taught that 
diffi culty is a crucial part of learning, errors are natural and 
to be expected, and practice helps, just as in learning to  ride a 

Make It Stick ê 92
bicycle. The other kids  were simply asked how they had gone 
about trying to solve the anagrams. Then both groups  were 
given a diffi cult test whose results provided a mea sure of 
working memory. The kids who had been taught that errors 
are a natural part of learning showed signifi cantly better use 
of working memory than did the others. These children did not 
expend their working memory capacity in agonizing over the 
diffi culty of the task. The theory was further tested in varia-
tions of the original study. The results support the fi nding that 
diffi culty can create feelings of incompetence that engender 
anxiety, which in turn disrupts learning, and that “students do 
better when given room to struggle with diffi culty.”17
These studies point out that not all diffi culties in learning 
are desirable ones. Anxiety while taking a test seems to repre-
sent an undesirable diffi culty. These studies also underscore 
the importance of learners understanding that diffi culty in 
learning new things is not only to be expected but can be ben-
efi cial. To this point, the French study stands on the shoulders 
of many others, among the foremost being the works of Carol 
Dweck and of Anders Ericsson, both of whom we discuss in 
Chapter 7 in relation to the topic of increasing intellectual 
abilities. Dweck’s work shows that people who believe that 
their intellectual ability is fi xed from birth, wired in their 
genes, tend to avoid challenges at which they may not succeed, 
because failure would appear to be an indication of lesser na-
tive ability. By contrast, people who are helped to understand 
that effort and learning change the brain, and that their intel-
lectual abilities lie to a large degree within their own control, 
are more likely to tackle diffi cult challenges and persist at 
them. They view failure as a sign of effort and as a turn in the 
road rather than as a mea sure of inability and the end of the 
road. Anders Ericsson’s work investigating the nature of expert 
per for mance shows that to achieve expertise requires thou-

Embrace Difficulties ê 93
sands of hours of dedicated practice in which one strives to 
surpass one’s current level of ability, a pro cess in which failure 
becomes an essential experience on the path to mastery.
The study of the French sixth graders received wide public-
ity and inspired the staging of a “Festival of Errors” by an elite 
graduate school in Paris, aimed at teaching French schoolchil-
dren that making mistakes is a constructive part of learning: 
not a sign of failure but of effort. Festival organizers argued 
that modern society’s focus on showing results has led to a 
culture of intellectual timorousness, starving the kind of intel-
lectual ferment and risk-taking that produced the great dis-
coveries that mark French history.
It  doesn’t require a great conceptual leap to get from Par-
is’s “Festival of Errors” to San Francisco’s “FailCon,” where 
technology entrepreneurs and venture capitalists meet once a 
year to study failures that gave them critical insights they 
needed in order to pivot in their business strategies so as to 
succeed. Thomas Edison called failure the source of inspira-
tion, and is said to have remarked, “I’ve not failed. I’ve just 
found 10,000 ways that don’t work.” He argued that perse-
verance in the face of failure is the key to success.
Failure underlies the scientifi c method, which has advanced 
our understanding of the world we inhabit. The qualities of 
per sis tence and resiliency, where failure is seen as useful infor-
mation, underlie successful innovation in every sphere and lie 
at the core of nearly all successful learning. Failure points to 
the need for redoubled effort, or liberates us to try different 
approaches. Steve Jobs, in his remarks to the Stanford Univer-
sity graduating class of 2005, spoke of being fi red at age thirty 
in 1985 from Apple Computer, which he had cofounded. “I 
didn’t see it then, but it turned out that getting fi red from Ap-
ple was the best thing that could have ever happened to me. 
The heaviness of being successful was replaced by the lightness 

Make It Stick ê 94
of being a beginner again, less sure about everything. It freed 
me to enter one of the most creative periods of my life.”
It’s not the failure that’s desirable, it’s the dauntless effort 
despite the risks, the discovery of what works and what  doesn’t 
that sometimes only failure can reveal. It’s trusting that trying 
to solve a puzzle serves us better than being spoon- fed the so-
lution, even if we fall short in our fi rst attempts at an answer.
An Example of Generative Learning
As we said earlier, the pro cess of trying to solve a problem 
without the benefi t of having been taught how is called gen-
erative learning, meaning that the learner is generating the 
answer rather than recalling it. Generation is another name 
for old- fashioned trial and error.  We’re all familiar with the 
stories of skinny kids in Silicon Valley garages messing around 
with computers and coming out billionaires. We would like to 
serve up a different kind of example  here: Minnesota’s Bonnie 
Blodgett.
Bonnie is a writer and a self- taught ornamental gardener in 
a constant argument with a voice in her head that keeps nat-
tering about all the ways her latest whim is sure to go haywire 
and embarrass her. While she is a woman of strong aesthetic 
sensibilities, she is also one of epic doubts. Her “learning 
style” might be called leap- before- you- look- because- if- you- 
look- fi rst- you- probably- won’t-like- what- you- see. Her garden 
writing appears under the name “The Blundering Gardener.” 
This moniker is a way of telling her voices of doubt to take a 
hike, because what ever the consequences of the next whim, 
she’s already rolling up her sleeves. “Blundering means that 
you get going on your project before you have fi gured out 
how to do it in the proper way, before you know what you’re 
getting into. For me, the risk of knowing what you’re getting 

Embrace Difficulties ê 95
into is that it becomes an overwhelming obstacle to getting 
started.”18
Bonnie’s success shows how struggling with a problem 
makes for strong learning, and how a sustained commitment 
to advancing in a par tic u lar fi eld of endeavor through trial- 
and- error effort leads to complex mastery and greater knowl-
edge of the interrelationships of things. When we spoke, she 
had just traveled to southern Minnesota to meet with a group 
of farmers who wanted her gardening insights on a gamut of 
issues ranging from layout and design to pest control and ir-
rigation. In the years since she fi rst sank her spade, Bonnie’s 
garden writing has won national recognition and found a de-
voted following far and wide through many outlets, and her 
garden has become a destination for other gardeners.
She came to ornamental gardening about the time she 
found herself eyeballing middle age. She had no training, just 
a burning desire to get her hands dirty making beautiful spaces 
on the corner lot of the home she shares with her husband in 
a historic neighborhood of St. Paul.
“The experience of creating beauty calms me down,” she 
says, but it’s strictly a discovery pro cess. She has always been 
a writer, and some years after having launched herself into the 
garden, she began publishing the Garden Letter, a quarterly 
for northern gardeners in which she chronicles her exploits, 
mishaps, lessons, and successes. She writes the same way that 
she gardens, with boldness and self- effacing humor, passing 
along the entertaining snafus and unexpected insights that are 
the fruits of experience. In calling herself the Blundering Gar-
dener, she is giving herself and us, her readers, permission to 
make mistakes and get on with it.
Note that in writing about her experiences, Bonnie is en-
gaging two potent learning pro cesses beyond the act of gar-
dening itself. She is retrieving the details and the story of what 

Make It Stick ê 96
she has discovered— say, about an experiment in grafting two 
species of fruit trees— and then she is elaborating by explain-
ing the experience to her readers, connecting the outcome to 
what she already knows about the subject or has learned as a 
result.
Her leap- taking impulses have taken her through vast 
swaths of the plant kingdom, of course, and deeply into the 
Latin nomenclature and the classic horticultural literature. 
These impulses have also drawn her into the aesthetics of 
space and structure and the mechanics thereof: building stone 
walls; digging and wiring water features; putting a cupola on 
the garage; building paths, stairs, and gates; ripping out a 
Gothic picket fence and reusing the wood to create something 
more open and with stronger horizontal lines to pull down 
the soaring verticality of her three- story Victorian  house and 
connect it with the gardens that surround it; making the out-
door spaces airier and more easily seen from the street, while 
still circumscribed, so as to impart that essential sense of pri-
vacy that makes a garden a room of its own. Her spaces are 
idiosyncratic and asymmetrical, giving the illusion of having 
evolved naturally, yet they cohere, through the repetition of 
textures, lines, and geometry.
A simple example of how she has backed into more and 
more complex mastery is the manner in which she came to 
embrace plant classifi cation and the Latin terminology. “When 
I started, the world of plants was a completely foreign lan-
guage to me. I would read gardening books and be completely 
lost. I didn’t know what plant names  were, common or Latin. 
I  wasn’t thinking about learning this stuff, ever. I’m like, Why 
would you want to do that? Why  wouldn’t you just get out-
side and dig a hole and put something in it?” What she rel-
ished  were pictures that gave her ideas and passages of text 
where the designers used phrases like “my pro cess” in describing 

Embrace Difficulties ê 97
how they had achieved the desired effect. It was the posses-
sive pronoun, my pro cess, that affi rmed Bonnie in her head-
long rush to learn by doing. The notion is that every gardener’s 
pro cess is uniquely his or her own. Bonnie’s pro cess did not 
involve taking direction from experts, much less mastering 
the Linnaean taxonomy or the Latin names of what she stuck 
in holes and dragged her water hose to. But as she thrashed 
around, working to achieve in dirt the magical spaces that 
danced in her mind, she came to Latin and Linnaeus despite 
herself.
“You begin to discover that the Latin names are helpful. 
They can give you a shortcut to understanding the nature of 
the plants, and they can help you remember. Tardiva, which 
is a species name, comes after hydrangea, which is a genus.” 
Bonnie had taken Latin in high school, along with French, 
and of course En glish, and the cues to those memories began 
to reawaken. “I can easily see that tardiva means late, like 
tardy. The same word comes after many plant varieties, so 
you see the genus and then the species is tardiva, and now 
you know that par tic u lar plant is a late bloomer. So you be-
gin to realize that the Latin names are a way of helping you 
remember, and you fi nd yourself using them more and more. 
Also you remember plants better, because it’s second nature 
to you that procumbus means prostrate, crawling on the 
ground. It makes sense. So now it’s not so hard to remember 
that par tic u lar species name when it’s attached to a genus. 
It’s also important to know the Latin names because then 
you can be absolutely specifi c about a plant. Plants have 
common names, and common names are regional. Actaea 
racemosa has a common name of black cohosh, but it’s also 
known as snakeroot, and those names are often given to 
other plants. There’s only one Actaea racemosa.” Gradually, 
and despite her inclination to resist, she came to grasp the 

Make It Stick ê 98
classical taxonomy of ornamental plants and to appreciate 
how Linnaeus’s schema frames family connections and com-
municates attributes.
Bonnie said that the farmers she had recently met  were 
particularly interested in what she has learned about the ad-
vantages of composting and earthworms over chemical fertil-
izers for building nutrients and soil aeration, and how to get 
strong root growth on low rations of water through a home-
made system of drip irrigation. She paused in recounting her 
meeting with them, refl ecting on how all of this knowledge 
has sneaked up on her. It was never something she set out to 
conquer. “Look, blundering’s really not a bad thing. It’s a good 
thing in that you get stuff done. A lot of people, when they 
contemplate the enormity of the task and they see all that’s 
entailed, they’re stopped in their tracks.”
Of course, in some settings— like learning to jump out of 
airplanes and walk away with your life— blundering is not 
the optimal learning strategy.
Undesirable Difﬁ culties
Elizabeth and Robert Bjork, who coined the phrase “desirable 
diffi culties,” write that diffi culties are desirable because “they 
trigger encoding and retrieval pro cesses that support learning, 
comprehension, and remembering. If, however, the learner 
does not have the background knowledge or skills to respond 
to them successfully, they become undesirable diffi culties.”19 
Cognitive scientists know from empirical studies that testing, 
spacing, interleaving, variation, generation, and certain kinds 
of contextual interference lead to stronger learning and reten-
tion. Beyond that, we have an intuitive sense of what kinds of 
diffi culties are undesirable but, for lack of the needed research, 
we cannot yet be defi nitive.

Embrace Difficulties ê 99
Clearly, impediments that you cannot overcome are not 
desirable. Outlining a lesson in a sequence different from the 
one in the textbook is not a desirable diffi culty for learners 
who lack the reading skills or language fl uency required to 
hold a train of thought long enough to reconcile the discrep-
ancy. If your textbook is written in Lithuanian and you don’t 
know the language, this hardly represents a desirable diffi -
culty. To be desirable, a diffi culty must be something learners 
can overcome through increased effort.
Intuitively it makes sense that diffi culties that don’t 
strengthen the skills you will need, or the kinds of challenges 
you are likely to encounter in the real- world application of 
your learning, are not desirable. Having somebody whisper 
in your ear while you read the news may be essential training 
for a TV anchor. Being heckled by role- playing protestors 
while honing your campaign speech may help train up a poli-
tician. But neither of these diffi culties is likely to be helpful for 
Rotary Club presidents or aspiring YouTube bloggers who 
want to improve their stage presence. A cub towboat pi lot on 
the Mississippi might be required in training to push a string 
of high- riding empty barges into a lock against a strong side 
wind. A baseball player might practice hitting with a weight 
on his bat to strengthen his swing. You might teach a football 
player some of the principles of ballet for learning balance and 
movement, but you probably would not teach him the tech-
niques for an effective golf drive or backhand tennis serve.
Is there an overarching rule that determines the kinds of 
impediments that make learning stronger? Time and further 
research may yield an answer. But the kinds of diffi culties 
 we’ve just described, whose desirability is well documented, 
offer a large and diverse toolkit already at hand.

Make It Stick ê 100
The Takeaway
Learning is at least a three- step pro cess: initial encoding of 
information is held in short- term working memory before be-
ing consolidated into a cohesive repre sen ta tion of knowledge 
in long- term memory. Consolidation reorganizes and stabi-
lizes memory traces, gives them meaning, and makes con-
nections to past experiences and to other knowledge already 
stored in long- term memory. Retrieval updates learning and 
enables you to apply it when you need it.
Learning always builds on a store of prior knowledge. We 
interpret and remember events by building connections to 
what we already know.
Long- term memory capacity is virtually limitless: the more 
you know, the more possible connections you have for adding 
new knowledge.
Because of the vast capacity of long- term memory, having 
the ability to locate and recall what you know when you need 
it is key; your facility for calling up what you know depends 
on the repeated use of the information (to keep retrieval routes 
strong) and on your establishing powerful retrieval cues that 
can reactivate the memories.
Periodic retrieval of learning helps strengthen connections 
to the memory and the cues for recalling it, while also weak-
ening routes to competing memories. Retrieval practice that’s 
easy does little to strengthen learning; the more diffi cult the 
practice, the greater the benefi t.
When you recall learning from short- term memory, as in 
rapid- fi re practice, little mental effort is required, and little 
long- term benefi t accrues. But when you recall it after some 
time has elapsed and your grasp of it has become a little rusty, 
you have to make an effort to reconstruct it. This effortful 
retrieval both strengthens the memory but also makes the 

Embrace Difficulties ê 101
learning pliable again, leading to its reconsolidation. Recon-
solidation helps update your memories with new information 
and connect them to more recent learning.
Repeated effortful recall or practice helps integrate learn-
ing into mental models, in which a set of interrelated ideas or 
a sequence of motor skills are fused into a meaningful  whole 
that can be adapted and applied in later settings. Examples 
are the perceptions and manipulations involved in driving a 
car or in knocking a curveball out of the ballpark.
When practice conditions are varied or retrieval is inter-
leaved with the practice of other material, we increase our 
abilities of discrimination and induction and the versatility 
with which we can apply the learning in new settings at a 
later date. Interleaving and variation build new connections, 
expanding and more fi rmly entrenching knowledge in mem-
ory and increasing the number of cues for retrieval.
Trying to come up with an answer rather than having it 
presented to you, or trying to solve a problem before being 
shown the solution, leads to better learning and longer reten-
tion of the correct answer or solution, even when your at-
tempted response is wrong, so long as corrective feedback is 
provided.

102
At the root of our effectiveness is our 
ability to grasp the world around us and to take the mea sure 
of our own per for mance.  We’re constantly making judgments 
about what we know and don’t know and whether  we’re ca-
pable of handling a task or solving a problem. As we work at 
something, we keep an eye on ourselves, adjusting our think-
ing or actions as we progress.
Monitoring your own thinking is what psychologists call 
metacognition (meta is Greek for “about”). Learning to be 
accurate self- observers helps us to stay out of blind alleys, 
make good decisions, and refl ect on how we might do better 
next time. An important part of this skill is being sensitive to 
the ways we can delude ourselves. One problem with poor 
judgment is that we usually don’t know when  we’ve got it. 
Another problem is the sheer scope of the ways our judgment 
can be led astray.1
5
Avoid Illusions of Knowing

Avoid Illusions of Knowing ê 103
In this chapter we discuss perceptual illusions, cognitive bi-
ases, and distortions of memory that commonly mislead peo-
ple. Then we suggest techniques for keeping your judgment 
squared with reality.
The consequences of poor judgment fi ll the daily papers. 
During the summer of 2008, three stickup artists in Minne-
apolis had a system going of phoning in large fast- food orders 
and then relieving the delivery man of all the goods and cash 
he carried. As a livelihood it was a model of simplicity. They 
kept at it, failing to consider the wisdom of always placing 
their orders from the same two cell phones and taking deliv-
ery at the same two addresses.
David Garman, a Minneapolis cop, was working under-
cover that summer. “It was getting more aggressive. At the 
beginning, it was ‘maybe they had a gun,’ then all of a sudden 
there  were a couple of guns, and then they  were hurting the 
people when they  were robbing them.”
It was a night in August when Garman got a call about a 
large order phoned in to a Chinese restaurant. He or ga nized a 
small team on short notice and prepared to pose as the deliv-
ery guy. He pulled on a bulletproof vest, covered it with a ca-
sual shirt, and shoved his .45 automatic into his pants. While 
his colleagues staked out positions near the delivery address, 
Garman picked up the food, drove there, and parked with his 
brights shining on the front door. He’d cut a slit in the bottom 
of the food bag and tucked a .38 inside to rest in his hand as 
he carried the package. “The .38 has a covered hammer on it, 
so I can shoot it in a bag. If I  were to put the automatic in 
there, it’d jam and I’d be screwed.”
So I walk up with the package and I say, “Hey, sir, did you 
order some food?” He says, “Yup,” and I’m thinking this guy’s 
really just going to pay me and I’m going to be out of  here, 

Make It Stick ê 104
and this is going to be the dumbest thing  we’ve ever done. I’m 
thinking if he hands me $40, I don’t even know how much 
this food is. But he turns his head to look halfway back and 
two other guys start to come up, and as they’re walking to-
wards me they fl ip hoods over their heads. That’s when I 
know it’s game time. The fi rst guy whips a gun out of his 
pocket and racks it and puts it to my head all in one motion, 
saying, “Give me everything you’ve got motherfucker or I’ll 
kill you.” I ended up shooting him through the bag. It was 
four rounds.2
Not such a great livelihood after all. The guy was hit low 
and survived, although he is a lesser man as a result. Garman 
would have aimed higher if the food package hadn’t been so 
heavy, and he took a lesson from the experience: he’s better 
prepared for the next time, though he’d rather we didn’t de-
scribe just how.
We like to think  we’re smarter than the average doodle, 
and even if  we’re not, we feel affi rmed in this delusion each 
year when the newest crop of Darwin Awards circulates by 
email, that short list of self- infl icted fatalities caused by spec-
tacularly poor judgment, as in the case of the attorney in To-
ronto who was demonstrating the strength of the windows in 
his twenty- two- story offi ce tower by throwing his shoulder 
against the glass when he broke it and fell through. The truth 
is that  we’re all hardwired to make errors in judgment. Good 
judgment is a skill one must acquire, becoming an astute 
 observer of one’s own thinking and per for mance. We start at 
a disadvantage for several reasons. One is that when  we’re 
incompetent, we tend to overestimate our competence and see 
little reason to change. Another is that, as humans, we are read-
ily misled by illusions, cognitive biases, and the stories we con-
struct to explain the world around us and our place within 

Avoid Illusions of Knowing ê 105
it. To become more competent, or even expert, we must learn 
to recognize competence when we see it in others, become 
more accurate judges of what we ourselves know and don’t 
know, adopt learning strategies that get results, and fi nd ob-
jective ways to track our progress.
Two Systems of Knowing
In his book Thinking, Fast and Slow, Daniel Kahneman de-
scribes our two analytic systems. What he calls System 1 (or 
the automatic system) is unconscious, intuitive, and immedi-
ate. It draws on our senses and memories to size up a situation 
in the blink of an eye. It’s the running back dodging tackles in 
his dash for the end zone. It’s the Minneapolis cop, walking 
up to a driver he’s pulled over on a chilly day, taking evasive 
action even before he’s fully aware that his eye has seen a bead 
of sweat run down the driver’s temple.
System 2 (the controlled system) is our slower pro cess of 
conscious analysis and reasoning. It’s the part of thinking that 
considers choices, makes decisions, and exerts self- control. 
We also use it to train System 1 to recognize and respond to 
par tic u lar situations that demand refl exive action. The run-
ning back is using System 2 when he walks through the moves 
in his playbook. The cop is using it when he practices taking a 
gun from a shooter. The neurosurgeon is using it when he re-
hearses his repair of the torn sinus.
System 1 is automatic and deeply infl uential, but it is sus-
ceptible to illusion, and you depend on System 2 to help you 
manage yourself: by checking your impulses, planning ahead, 
identifying choices, thinking through their implications, and 
staying in charge of your actions. When a guy in a restaurant 
walks past a mother with an infant and the infant cries out 
“Dada!” that’s System 1. When the blushing mother says, 

Make It Stick ê 106
“No, dear, that’s not Dada, that’s a man,” she is acting as a 
surrogate System 2, helping the infant refi ne her System 1.
System 1 is powerful because it draws on our accumulated 
years of experience and our deep emotions. System 1 gives us 
the survival refl ex in moments of danger, and the astonishing 
deftness earned through thousands of hours of deliberate 
practice in a chosen fi eld of expertise. In the interplay be-
tween Systems 1 and 2— the topic of Malcolm Gladwell’s 
book Blink—your instantaneous ability to size up a situation 
plays against your capacity for skepticism and thoughtful 
analysis. Of course, when System 1’s conclusions arise out of 
misperception or illusion, they can steer you into trouble. 
Learning when to trust your intuition and when to question it 
is a big part of how you improve your competence in the 
world at large and in any fi eld where you want to be expert. 
It’s not just the dullards who fall victim. We all do, to varying 
degrees. Pi lots, for example, are susceptible to a host of per-
ceptual illusions. They are trained to beware of them and to 
use their instruments to know that they’re getting things right.
A frightening example with a happy ending is China Airlines 
Flight 006 on a winter day in 1985. The Boeing 747 was 
41,000 feet above the Pacifi c, almost ten hours into its eleven- 
hour fl ight from Taipei to LA, when engine number 4 lost 
power. The plane began to lose airspeed. Rather than taking 
manual control and descending below 30,000 feet to restart 
the engine, as prescribed in the fl ight book, the crew held at 
41,000 with the autopi lot engaged and attempted a restart. 
Meanwhile, loss of the outboard engine gave the plane asym-
metrical thrust. The autopi lot tried to correct for this and 
keep the plane level, but as the plane continued to slow it 
also began to roll to the right. The captain was aware of the 

Avoid Illusions of Knowing ê 107
deceleration, but not the extent to which the plane had en-
tered a right bank; his System 1 clue would have been his 
vestibular refl ex— how the inner ear senses balance and 
spatial orientation—but because of the plane’s trajectory, 
he had the sensation of fl ying level. His System 2 clues would 
have been a glimpse at the horizon and his instruments. Cor-
rect procedure called for applying left rudder to help raise the 
right wing, but his System 2 focus was on the airspeed indica-
tor and on the efforts of the fi rst offi cer and engineer to re-
start the engine.
As its bank increased, the plane descended through 37,000 
feet into high clouds, which obscured the horizon. The cap-
tain switched off the autopi lot and pushed the nose down to 
get more speed, but the plane had already rolled beyond 45 
degrees and now turned upside down and fell into an uncon-
trolled descent. The crew  were confused by the situation. They 
understood the plane was behaving erratically but  were un-
aware they had overturned and  were in a dive. They could no 
longer discern thrust from engines 1– 3 and concluded those 
engines had quit as well. The plane’s dive was evident from 
their fl ight gauges, but the angle was so unlikely the crew de-
cided the gauges had failed. At 11,000 feet they broke through 
the clouds, astonished to see that they  were roaring toward 
earth. The captain and fi rst offi cer both pulled back hard on 
the stick, exerting enormous forces on the plane but manag-
ing to level off. Landing gear hung from the plane’s belly, and 
they’d lost one of their hydraulic systems, but all four engines 
came to life, and the captain was able to fl y on, diverting suc-
cessfully to San Francisco. An inspection revealed just how 
severe their maneuver had been. Strains fi ve times the force of 
gravity had bent the plane’s wings permanently upward, bro-
ken two landing gear struts, and torn away two landing gear 
doors and large parts of the rear horizontal stabilizers.

Make It Stick ê 108
“Spatial disorientation” is the aeronautical term for a 
deadly combination of two elements: losing sight of the hori-
zon and relying on human sensory perception that  doesn’t 
jibe with reality but is so convincing that pi lots conclude their 
cockpit instruments have failed. As Kahneman says, System 1, 
the instinctual, refl exive system that detects danger and keeps 
us safe, can be very hard to overrule. Flight 006’s initial inci-
dent, the loss of an engine cruising at altitude, is not consid-
ered an emergency, but it quickly became one as a result of 
the captain’s actions. Rather than following prescribed proce-
dure, and rather than fully engaging his System 2 analytic re-
sources by monitoring all his instruments, he let himself be-
come preoccupied with the engine restart and with a single 
fl ight indicator, airspeed. Then, when things spiraled out of 
control, he trusted his senses over his gauges, in effect trying 
to construct his own narrative of what was happening to the 
plane.
There’s a long list of illusions to which pi lots can fall prey 
(some with mordant names like “the leans,” “graveyard spin,” 
and “the black hole approach”) and sites on the Internet where 
you can listen to the chilling last words of pi lots struggling 
and failing to understand and correct what’s gone wrong in 
the sky. Spatial disorientation was deemed the probable cause 
of the crash that killed Mel Carnahan, the governor of Mis-
souri, while being fl own through a thunderstorm one night in 
October 2000, and the probable cause of the crash that killed 
John F. Kennedy Jr. and his wife and her sister off the shore of 
Martha’s Vineyard on a hazy night in July 1999. Fortunately, 
the China Airlines incident came to a good end, but the Na-
tional Transportation Safety Board report of that incident re-
veals just how quickly training and professionalism can be 
hijacked by System 1 illusion, and therefore why we need to 

Avoid Illusions of Knowing ê 109
cultivate a disciplined System 2, conscious analysis and rea-
soning, that always keeps one eye on the fl ight instruments.3
Illusions and Memory Distortions
The fi lmmaker Errol Morris, in a series of articles on illusion 
in the New York Times, quotes the social psychologist David 
Dunning on humans’ penchant for “motivated reasoning,” or, 
as Dunning put it, the “sheer genius people have at convinc-
ing themselves of congenial conclusions while denying the 
truth of incon ve nient ones.”4 (The British prime minister Ben-
jamin Disraeli once said of a po liti cal opponent that his con-
science was not his guide but his accomplice.) There are many 
ways that our System 1 and System 2 judgments can be led 
astray: perceptual illusions like those experienced by pi lots, 
faulty narrative, distortions of memory, failure to recognize 
when a new kind of problem requires a new kind of solution, 
and a variety of cognitive biases to which  we’re prone. We 
describe a number of these hazards  here, and then we offer 
mea sures you can take, akin to scanning the cockpit instru-
ments, to help keep your thinking aligned with reality.
Our understanding of the world is shaped by a hunger for 
narrative that rises out of our discomfort with ambiguity and 
arbitrary events. When surprising things happen, we search 
for an explanation. The urge to resolve ambiguity can be sur-
prisingly potent, even when the subject is inconsequential. In 
a study where participants thought they  were being mea sured 
for reading comprehension and their ability to solve anagrams, 
they  were exposed to the distraction of a background phone 
conversation. Some heard only one side of a conversation, 

Make It Stick ê 110
and others heard both sides. The participants, not knowing 
that the distraction itself was the subject of the study, tried to 
ignore what they  were hearing so as to stay focused on the 
reading and anagram solutions. The results showed that over-
hearing one side of a conversation proved more distracting 
than overhearing both sides, and the content of those partial 
conversations was better recalled later by the unintentional 
eavesdroppers. Why was this? Presumably, those overhearing 
half a conversation  were strongly compelled to try to infer the 
missing half in a way that made for a complete narrative. As 
the authors point out, the study may help explain why we fi nd 
one- sided cell phone conversations in public spaces so intru-
sive, but it also reveals the ineluctable way we are drawn to 
imbue the events around us with rational explanations.
The discomfort with ambiguity and arbitrariness is equally 
powerful, or more so, in our need for a rational understand-
ing of our own lives. We strive to fi t the events of our lives 
into a cohesive story that accounts for our circumstances, the 
things that befall us, and the choices we make. Each of us has 
a different narrative that has many threads woven into it 
from our shared culture and experience of being human, as 
well as many distinct threads that explain the singular events 
of one’s personal past. All these experiences infl uence what 
comes to mind in a current situation and the narrative through 
which you make sense of it: Why nobody in my family at-
tended college until me. Why my father never made a fortune 
in business. Why I’d never want to work in a corporation, or, 
maybe, Why I would never want to work for myself. We 
gravitate to the narratives that best explain our emotions. In 
this way, narrative and memory become one. The memories 
we or ga nize meaningfully become those that are better re-
membered. Narrative provides not only meaning but also a 

Avoid Illusions of Knowing ê 111
mental framework for imbuing future experiences and infor-
mation with meaning, in effect shaping new memories to fi t our 
established constructs of the world and ourselves. No reader, 
when asked to account for the choices made under pressure by 
a novel’s protagonist, can keep her own life experience from 
shading her explanation of what must have been going on in 
the character’s interior world. The success of a magician or 
politician, like that of a novelist, relies on the seductive powers 
of narrative and on the audience’s willing suspension of disbe-
lief. Nowhere is this more evident than in the national po liti cal 
debate, where like- minded people gather online, at community 
meetings, and in the media to fi nd common purpose and ex-
pand the story they feel best explains their sense of how the 
world works and how humans and politicians should behave.
You can see how quickly personal narrative is invoked to 
explain emotions when you read an article online whose au-
thor has argued a position on almost any subject— for exam-
ple, an op- ed piece supporting the use of testing as a powerful 
tool for learning. Scan the comments posted by readers: some 
sing hallelujah while others can scarcely contain their um-
brage, each invoking a personal story that supports or refutes 
the column’s main argument. The psychologists Larry Jacoby, 
Bob Bjork, and Colleen Kelley, summing up studies on illu-
sions of comprehension, competence, and remembering, write 
that it is nearly impossible to avoid basing one’s judgments on 
subjective experience. Humans do not give greater credence 
to an objective record of a past event than to their subjective 
remembering of it, and we are surprisingly insensitive to the 
ways our par tic u lar construals of a situation are unique to 
ourselves. Thus the narrative of memory becomes central to 
our intuitions regarding the judgments we make and the ac-
tions we take.5

Make It Stick ê 112
It is a confounding paradox, then, that the changeable na-
ture of our memory not only can skew our perceptions but 
also is essential to our ability to learn. As will be familiar to 
you by now, every time we call up a memory, we make the 
mind’s routes to that memory stronger, and this capacity to 
strengthen, expand, and modify memory is central to how we 
deepen our learning and broaden the connections to what we 
know and what we can do. Memory has some similarities to 
a Google search algorithm, in the sense that the more you 
connect what you learn to what you already know, and the 
more associations you make to a memory (for example, link-
ing it with a visual image, a place, or a larger story), then the 
more mental cues you have through which to fi nd and retrieve 
the memory again later. This capacity expands our agency: 
our ability to take action and be effective in the world. At the 
same time, because memory is a shape- shifter, reconciling the 
competing demands of emotion, suggestions, and narrative, it 
serves you well to stay open to the fallibility of your certain-
ties: even your most cherished memories may not represent 
events in the exact way they occurred.
Memory can be distorted in many ways. People interpret a 
story in light of their world knowledge, imposing order where 
none had been present so as to make a more logical story. 
Memory is a reconstruction. We cannot remember every as-
pect of an event, so we remember those elements that have 
greatest emotional signifi cance for us, and we fi ll in the gaps 
with details of our own that are consistent with our narrative 
but may be wrong.
People remember things that  were implied but not specifi -
cally stated. The literature is full of examples. In one, many 
people who read a paragraph about a troubled girl named 
Helen Keller later mistakenly recalled the phrase “deaf, dumb, 
and blind” as being in the text. This mistake was rarely made 

Avoid Illusions of Knowing ê 113
by another group who read the same paragraph about a girl 
named Carol Harris.6
Imagination infl ation refers to the tendency of people who, 
when asked to imagine an event vividly, will sometimes begin 
to believe, when asked about it later, that the event actually 
occurred. Adults who  were asked “Did you ever break a win-
dow with your hand?”  were more likely on a later life inven-
tory to report that they believed this event occurred during 
their lifetimes. It seems that asking the question led them to 
imagine the event, and the act of having imagined it had the 
effect, later, of making them more likely to think it had oc-
curred (relative to another group who answered the question 
without having previously imagined it occurring).
Hypothetical events that are imagined vividly can seat them-
selves in the mind as fi rmly as memories of actual events. For 
instance, when it is suspected that a child is being sexually 
abused and he is interviewed and questioned about it, he may 
imagine experiences that the interviewer describes and then 
later come to “remember” them as having occurred.7 (Sadly, 
of course, many memories of childhood sexual abuse are ab-
solutely true, usually ones reported soon after the occurrence.)
Another type of memory illusion is one caused by suggestion, 
which may arise simply in the way a question is asked. In one 
example, people watched a video of a car running a stop sign 
at an intersection and colliding with another car passing 
through. Those who  were later asked to judge the speed of the 
vehicles when they “contacted” each other gave an average 
estimate of thirty- two miles per hour. Those who  were asked 
to judge the speed when the two vehicles “smashed” into each 

Make It Stick ê 114
other estimated on average forty- one miles per hour. If the 
speed limit was thirty miles per hour, asking the question the 
second way rather than the fi rst could lead to the driver’s be-
ing charged with speeding. Of course, the legal system knows 
the danger of witnesses being asked “leading questions” (ones 
that encourage a par tic u lar answer), but such questions are 
diffi cult to avoid completely, because suggestibility can be 
very subtle. After all, in the case just discussed, the two cars 
did “smash together.”8
Some witnesses to crimes who are struggling to recall them 
are instructed to let their minds roam freely, to generate what-
ever comes to mind, even if it is a guess. However, the act of 
guessing about possible events causes people to provide their 
own misinformation, which, if left uncorrected, they may 
later come to retrieve as memories. That is one reason why 
people who have been interviewed after being hypnotized are 
barred from testifying in court in almost all states and Cana-
dian provinces. The hypnotic interview typically encourages 
people to let their thoughts roam freely and produce every-
thing that comes to mind, in hopes that they will retrieve in-
formation that would not otherwise be produced. However, 
this pro cess causes them to produce much erroneous informa-
tion, and studies have shown that when they are tested later, 
under instructions only to tell exactly what they remember of 
the actual events, their guesses made while under hypnosis 
cloud their memories about what truly happened. In par tic u-
lar, they remember events they produced under hypnosis as 
actual experiences, even under conditions (in the laboratory) 
when it is known that the events in question did not occur.9
Interference from other events can distort memory. Suppose 
the police interview a witness shortly after a crime, showing 

Avoid Illusions of Knowing ê 115
pictures of possible suspects. Time passes, but eventually the 
police nab a suspect, one whose picture had been viewed by 
the witness. If the witness is now asked to view a lineup, he 
may mistakenly remember one of the suspects whose photo 
he saw as having been present at the crime. A particularly 
vivid example of a related pro cess happened to the Australian 
psychologist Donald M. Thomson. A woman in Sydney was 
watching tele vi sion in midday when she heard a knock at the 
door. When she answered it, she was attacked, raped, and left 
unconscious. When she awoke and dialed the police, they came 
to her aid, got a description of her assailant, and launched 
a  search. They spotted Donald Thomson walking down a 
Sydney street, and he matched the description. They arrested 
him on the spot. It turns out that Thomson had an airtight 
 alibi— at the exact time of the rape, he was being interviewed 
on a live tele vi sion show. The police did not believe him and 
sneered when he was being interrogated. However, the story 
was true. The woman had been watching the show when she 
heard the knock on the door. The description she gave the 
police was apparently of the man she saw on tele vi sion, Don-
ald Thomson, rather than the rapist. Her System 1 reaction— 
quick but sometimes mistaken— provided the wrong descrip-
tion, probably due to her extreme emotional state.10
What psychologists call the curse of knowledge is our ten-
dency to underestimate how long it will take another person 
to learn something new or perform a task that we have al-
ready mastered. Teachers often suffer this illusion— the calcu-
lus instructor who fi nds calculus so easy that she can no lon-
ger place herself in the shoes of the student who is just starting 
out and struggling with the subject. The curse-of-knowledge 
effect is close kin to hindsight bias, or what is often called the 

Make It Stick ê 116
knew- it- all- along effect, in which we view events after the fact 
as having been more predictable than they  were before they 
occurred. Stock market pundits will confi dently announce on 
the eve ning news why the stock market behaved as it did that 
day, even though they could not have predicted the move-
ments that morning.11
Accounts that sound familiar can create the feeling of know-
ing and be mistaken for true. This is one reason that po liti cal 
or advertising claims that are not factual but are repeated can 
gain traction with the public, particularly if they have emo-
tional resonance. Something you once heard that you hear 
again later carries a warmth of familiarity that can be mis-
taken for memory, a shred of something you once knew and 
cannot quite place but are inclined to believe. In the world of 
propaganda, this is called “the big lie” technique— even a big 
lie told repeatedly can come to be accepted as truth.
Fluency illusions result from our tendency to mistake fl uency 
with a text for mastery of its content. For example, if you read 
a particularly lucid pre sen ta tion of a diffi cult concept, you can 
get the idea that it is actually pretty simple and perhaps even 
that you knew it all along. As discussed earlier, students who 
study by rereading their texts can mistake their fl uency with a 
text, gained from rereading, for possession of accessible knowl-
edge of the subject and consequently overestimate how well 
they will do on a test.
Our memories are also subject to social infl uence and tend to 
align with the memories of the people around us. If you are in 

Avoid Illusions of Knowing ê 117
a group reminiscing about past experiences and someone 
adds a wrong detail about the story, you will tend to incorpo-
rate this detail into your own memory and later remember the 
experience with the erroneous detail. This pro cess is called 
“memory conformity” or the “social contagion of memory”: 
one person’s error can “infect” another person’s memory. Of 
course, social infl uences are not always bad. If someone recalls 
details of joint memory on which you are somewhat hazy, 
your subsequent memory will be updated and will hold a 
more accurate record of the past event.12
In the obverse of the social infl uence effect, humans are pre-
disposed to assume that others share their beliefs, a pro cess 
called the false consensus effect. We generally fail to recognize 
the idiosyncratic nature of our personal understanding of the 
world and interpretation of events and that ours differ from 
others’. Recall how surprised you  were recently, on commiser-
ating with a friend about the general state of affairs, to discover 
that she sees in an entirely different light matters on which you 
thought the correct view was fundamental and obvious: cli-
mate change, gun control, fracking of gas wells— or perhaps 
something very local, such as whether to pass a bond issue for 
a school building or to oppose construction of a big box store 
in the neighborhood.13
Confi dence in a memory is not a reliable indication of its ac-
curacy. We can have utmost faith in a vivid, nearly literal 
memory of an event and yet fi nd that we actually have it all 
wrong. National tragedies, like the assassination of President 
John Kennedy or the events surrounding 9/11, create what 
psychologists call “fl ashbulb” memories, named for the vivid 

Make It Stick ê 118
images that we retain: where we  were when we got the news, 
how we learned it, how we felt, what we did. These memories 
are thought to be indelible, burned into our minds, and it is 
true that the broad outlines of such catastrophes, thoroughly 
reported in the media, are well remembered, but your mem-
ory of your personal circumstances surrounding the events 
may not necessarily be accurate. There have been numerous 
studies of this phenomenon, including surveys of fi fteen hun-
dred Americans’ memories of the September 11 attacks. In 
this study, the respondents’ memories  were surveyed a week 
after the attacks, again a year later, and then again three years 
and ten years later. Respondents’ most emotional memories 
of their personal details at the time they learned of the attacks 
are also those of which they are most confi dent and, paradoxi-
cally, the ones that have most changed over the years relative 
to other memories about 9/11.14
Mental Models
As we develop mastery in the various areas of our lives, we 
tend to bundle together the incremental steps that are required 
to solve different kinds of problems. To use an analogy from 
a previous chapter, you could think of them as something 
like smart- phone apps in the brain. We call them mental mod-
els. Two examples in police work are the choreography of the 
routine traffi c stop and the moves to take a weapon from an 
assailant at close quarters. Each of these maneuvers involves a 
set of perceptions and actions that cops can adapt with little 
conscious thought in response to context and situation. For a 
barista, a mental model would be the steps and ingredients to 
produce a perfect sixteen- ounce decaf frappuccino. For the 
receptionist at urgent care, it’s triage and registration.

Avoid Illusions of Knowing ê 119
The better you know something, the more diffi cult it be-
comes to teach it. So says physicist and educator Eric Mazur 
of Harvard. Why? As you get more expert in complex areas, 
your models in those areas grow more complex, and the com-
ponent steps that compose them fade into the background of 
memory (the curse of knowledge). A physicist, for example, 
will create a mental library of the principles of physics she can 
use to solve the various kinds of problems she encounters in 
her work: Newton’s laws of motion, for example, or the laws 
of conservation of momentum. She will tend to sort problems 
based on their underlying principles, whereas a novice will 
group them by similarity of surface features, like the appara-
tus being manipulated in the problem (pulley, inclined plane, 
 etc.). One day, when she goes to teach an intro physics class, 
she explains how a par tic u lar problem calls for something 
from Newtonian mechanics, forgetting that her students have 
yet to master the underlying steps she has long ago bundled 
into one unifi ed mental model. This presumption by the pro-
fessor that her students will readily follow something com-
plex that appears fundamental in her own mind is a metacog-
nitive error, a misjudgment of the matchup between what 
she knows and what her students know. Mazur says that the 
person who knows best what a student is struggling with in 
assimilating new concepts is not the professor, it’s another 
student.15 This problem is illustrated through a very simple 
experiment in which one person plays a common tune inside 
her head and taps the rhythm with her knuckles and another 
person hearing the rhythmic taps must guess the tune. Each 
tune comes from a fi xed set of twenty- fi ve, so the statistical 
chance of guessing it is 4 percent. Tellingly, the participants 
who have the tune in mind estimate that the other person will 
guess correctly 50 percent of the time, but in fact the listeners 

Make It Stick ê 120
guess correctly only 2.5 percent of the time, no better than 
chance.16
Like Coach Dooley’s football players memorizing their play-
books, we all build mental libraries of myriad useful solutions 
that we can call on at will to help us work our way from one 
Saturday game to the next. But we can be tripped by these 
models, too, when we fail to recognize a new problem that 
appears to be a familiar one is actually something quite differ-
ent and we pull out a solution to address it that  doesn’t work 
or makes things worse. The failure to recognize when your 
solution  doesn’t fi t the problem is another form of faulty self- 
observation that can lead you into trouble.
Mike Ebersold, the neurosurgeon, was called into the op-
erating room one day to help a surgical resident who, in the 
midst of removing a brain tumor, was losing the patient. The 
usual model for cutting out a tumor calls for taking your time, 
working carefully around the growth, getting a clean margin, 
saving the surrounding nerves. But when the growth is in the 
brain, and if you get bleeding behind it, pressure on the brain 
can turn fatal. Instead of slow- and- careful, you need just the 
opposite, cutting the growth out very quickly so the blood 
can drain, and then working to repair the bleeding. “Initially 
you might be a little timid to take the big step,” Mike says. “It’s 
not pretty, but the patient’s survival depends on your knowing 
to switch gears and do it fast.” Mike assisted, and the surgery 
was successful.
Like the infant who calls the stranger Dada, we must culti-
vate the ability to discern when our mental models aren’t 
working: when a situation that seems familiar is actually dif-
ferent and requires that we reach for a different solution and 
do something new.

Avoid Illusions of Knowing ê 121
Unskilled and Unaware of It
Incompetent people lack the skills to improve because they are 
unable to distinguish between incompetence and competence. 
This phenomenon, of par tic u lar interest for metacognition, 
has been named the Dunning- Kruger effect after the psycholo-
gists David Dunning and Justin Kruger. Their research showed 
that incompetent people overestimate their own competence 
and, failing to sense a mismatch between their per for mance 
and what is desirable, see no need to try to improve. (The title of 
their initial paper on the topic was “Unskilled and Unaware 
of It.”) Dunning and Kruger have also shown that incompe-
tent people can be taught to raise their competence by learning 
the skills to judge their own per for mance more accurately, in 
short, to make their metacognition more accurate. In one se-
ries of studies that demonstrate this fi nding, they gave students 
a test of logic and asked them to rate their own per for mance. In 
the fi rst experiment the results confi rmed expectations that the 
least competent students  were the most out of touch with their 
per for mance: students who scored at the twelfth percentile on 
average believed that their general logical reasoning ability fell 
at the sixty- eighth percentile.
In a second experiment, after taking an initial test and rat-
ing their own per for mance, the students  were shown the other 
students’ answers and then their own answers and asked to 
reestimate the number of test questions they had answered 
correctly. The students whose per for mance was in the bottom 
quartile failed to judge their own per for mance more accu-
rately after seeing the more competent choices of their peers 
and in fact tended to raise their already infl ated estimates of 
their own ability.
A third experiment explored whether poor performers could 
learn to improve their judgment. The students  were given ten 

Make It Stick ê 122
problems in logical reasoning and after the test  were asked to 
rate their logical reasoning skills and test per for mance. Once 
again, the students in the bottom quartile grossly overesti-
mated their per for mance. Next, half the students received 
ten minutes of training in logic (how to test the accuracy of a 
syllogism); the other half of the students  were given an unre-
lated task. All the students  were then asked to estimate again 
how well they had performed on the test. Now the students in 
the bottom quartile who had received the training  were much 
more accurate estimators of the number of questions they got 
right and of how they performed compared to the other stu-
dents. Those in the bottom quartile who didn’t receive the 
training held to their mistaken conviction that they had per-
formed well.
How is it that incompetent people fail to learn through 
experience that they are unskilled? Dunning and Kruger offer 
several theories. One is that people seldom receive negative 
feedback about their skills and abilities from others in every-
day life, because people don’t like to deliver the bad news. 
Even if people get negative feedback, they must come to an 
accurate understanding of why the failure occurred. For suc-
cess everything must go right, but by contrast, failure can be 
attributed to any number of external causes: it’s easy to blame 
the tool for what the hand cannot do. Finally, Dunning and 
Kruger suggest that some people are just not astute at reading 
how other people are performing and are therefore less able 
to spot competence when they see it, making them less able to 
make comparative judgments of their own per for mance.
These effects are more likely to occur in some contexts and 
with some skills than with others. In some domains, the reve-
lation of one’s incompetence can be brutally frank. The au-
thors can all remember from their childhoods when a teacher 
would appoint two boys to pick other kids for softball teams. 

Avoid Illusions of Knowing ê 123
The good players are picked fi rst, the worst last. You learn 
your peers’ judgments of your softball abilities in a very pub-
lic manner, so it would be hard for the last- picked player to 
think “I must be really good at softball.” However, most 
realms of life do not render such stark judgments of ability.17
To sum up, the means by which we navigate the world— 
Daniel Kahneman’s Systems 1 and 2— rely on our perceptual 
systems, intuition, memory, and cognition, with all their tics, 
warts, biases, and fl aws. Each of us is an astounding bundle of 
perceptual and cognitive abilities, coexisting with the seeds of 
our own undoing. When it comes to learning, what we choose 
to do is guided by our judgments of what works and what 
 doesn’t, and we are easily misled.
Our susceptibility to illusion and misjudgment should give 
us all pause, and especially so to the advocates of “student- 
directed learning,” a theory now current among some parents 
and educators. This theory holds that students know best what 
they need to study to master a subject, and what pace and 
methods work best for them. For example, at Manhattan Free 
School in East Harlem, opened in 2008, students “do not re-
ceive grades, take tests or have to do anything they do not feel 
like doing.” The Brooklyn Free School, which opened in 2004, 
along with a new crop of homeschooling families who call 
themselves “unschoolers,” follows the precept that what ever 
intrigues the learner is what will result in the best learning. 18
The intent is laudatory. We know that students need to take 
more control of their own learning by employing strategies 
like those we have discussed. For example, they need to test 
themselves, both to attain the direct benefi ts of increased re-
tention and to determine what they know and don’t know to 
more accurately judge their progress and focus on material 

Make It Stick ê 124
that needs more work. But few students practice these strate-
gies, and those who do will need more than encouragement if 
they are to practice them effectively: It turns out that even 
when students understand that retrieval practice is a superior 
strategy, they often fail to persist long enough to get the last-
ing benefi t. For example, when students are presented with a 
body of material to master, say a stack of foreign vocabulary 
fl ashcards, and are free to decide when to drop a card out of 
the deck because they’ve learned it, most students drop the 
card when they’ve gotten it right once or twice, far sooner 
than they should. The paradox is that those students who 
employ the least effective study strategies overestimate their 
learning the most and, as a consequence of their misplaced 
confi dence, they are not inclined to change their habits.
The football player preparing for next Saturday’s game 
 doesn’t leave his per for mance to intuition, he runs through his 
plays and mixes it up to discover the rough edges and work 
them out on the fi eld well before suiting up for the big game. 
If this kind of behavior  were anywhere close to the norm for 
students in their academics today, then self- directed learning 
would be highly effective. But of course the football player is 
not self- directed, his practice is guided by a coach. Likewise, 
most students will learn academics better under an instructor 
who knows where improvement is needed and structures the 
practice required to achieve it.19
The answer to illusion and misjudgment is to replace sub-
jective experience as the basis for decisions with a set of ob-
jective gauges outside ourselves, so that our judgment squares 
with the real world around us. When we have reliable refer-
ence points, like cockpit instruments, and make a habit of 
checking them, we can make good decisions about where to 
focus our efforts, recognize when  we’ve lost our bearings, and 
fi nd our way back again.  Here are some examples.

Avoid Illusions of Knowing ê 125
Tools and Habits for Calibrating 
Your Judgment
Most important is to make frequent use of testing and re-
trieval practice to verify what you really do know versus what 
you think you know. Frequent low- stakes quizzes in class help 
the instructor verify that students are in fact learning as well 
as they appear to be and reveal the areas where extra atten-
tion is needed. Doing cumulative quizzing, as Andy Sobel 
does in his po liti cal economics course, is especially powerful 
for consolidating learning and knitting the concepts from one 
stage of a course into new material encountered later. As a 
learner, you can use any number of practice techniques to self- 
test your mastery, from answering fl ashcards to explaining 
key concepts in your own words, and to peer instruction (see 
below).
Don’t make the mistake of dropping material from your 
testing regime once you’ve gotten it correct a couple of times. 
If it’s important, it needs to be practiced, and practiced again. 
And don’t put stock in momentary gains that result from 
massed practice. Space your testing, vary your practice, keep 
the long view.
Peer instruction, a learning model developed by Eric Mazur, 
incorporates many of the foregoing principles. The material 
to be covered in class is assigned for reading beforehand. In 
class, the lecture is interspersed with quick tests that present 
students with a conceptual question and give them a minute 
or two to grapple with it; they then try, in small groups, to 
reach a consensus on the correct answer. In Mazur’s experi-
ence, this pro cess engages the students in the underlying con-
cepts of the lecture material; reveals students’ problems in 

Make It Stick ê 126
reaching understanding; and provides opportunities for them 
to explain their understanding, receive feedback, and assess 
their learning compared to other students. Likewise, the pro-
cess serves as a gauge for the instructor of how well the stu-
dents are assimilating the material and in what areas more or 
less work is needed. Mazur tries to pair students who initially 
had different answers to a question so that they can see an-
other point of view and try to convince one another of who is 
right.
For two more examples of this technique, see the pro-
fi les of the professors Mary Pat Wenderoth and Michael 
D. Matthews in Chapter 8.20
Pay attention to the cues you’re using to judge what you have 
learned. Whether something feels familiar or fl uent is not al-
ways a reliable indicator of learning. Neither is your level of 
ease in retrieving a fact or a phrase on a quiz shortly after 
encountering it in a lecture or text. (Ease of retrieval after a 
delay, however, is a good indicator of learning.) Far better is 
to create a mental model of the material that integrates the 
various ideas across a text, connects them to what you al-
ready know, and enables you to draw inferences. How ably 
you can explain a text is an excellent cue for judging compre-
hension, because you must recall the salient points from 
memory, put them into your own words, and explain why 
they are signifi cant— how they relate to the larger subject.
Instructors should give corrective feedback, and learners 
should seek it. In his interview with Errol Morris, the psy-
chologist David Dunning argues that the path to self- insight 
leads through other people. “So it really depends on what sort 

Avoid Illusions of Knowing ê 127
of feedback you are getting. Is the world telling you good 
things? Is the world rewarding you in a way that you would 
expect a competent person to be rewarded? If you watch 
other people, you often fi nd there are different ways to do 
things; there are better ways to do things. ‘I’m not as good as 
I thought I was, but I have something to work on.’ ” Think of 
the kids lining up to join the softball team— would you be 
picked?21
In many fi elds, the practice of peer review serves as an ex-
ternal gauge, providing feedback on one’s per for mance. Most 
medical practice groups have morbidity/mortality confer-
ences, and if a doctor has a bad patient outcome, it will be 
presented there. The other doctors will pick it apart, or say 
“You did a good job, it was just a bad situation.” Mike Eber-
sold argues that people in his fi eld should practice as a part of 
a group. “If there are other neurosurgeons around you, it’s a 
safeguard. If you’re doing something that’s not acceptable, 
they’ll call you to task for it.”
In many settings, your judgment and learning are calibrated 
by working alongside a more experienced partner: airline fi rst 
offi cers with captains, rookies with seasoned cops, residents 
with experienced surgeons. The apprentice model is a very old 
one in human experience, as novices (whether cobblers or at-
torneys) have traditionally learned their craft from experi-
enced practitioners.
In other settings, teams are formed of people with comple-
mentary areas of expertise. When doctors implant medical 
devices like pacemakers and neural stimulators of the type 
that treat incontinence or the symptoms of Parkinson’s dis-
ease, the manufacturer has a product representative right in 
the operating room with the surgeon. The rep has seen many 

Make It Stick ê 128
surgeries using the device, knows the kinds of patients that 
will benefi t from it, knows the contraindications and adverse 
events, and has a hotline to the engineers and clinicians on the 
company’s staff. The rep tracks the surgery to make sure the 
device is implanted in the correct position, the leads are in-
serted to the correct depth, and so on. Every part of the team 
benefi ts. The patient is assured of an appropriate and success-
ful surgery. The doctor gets product and troubleshooting ex-
pertise at her fi ngertips. And the company makes sure its 
products are used correctly.
Training that simulates the kinds of demands and changeable 
conditions that can be expected in real- world settings helps 
learners and trainers assess mastery and focus on areas where 
understanding or competency need to be raised. Take police 
work, where many different forms of simulation are used in 
training. For fi rearms training it’s often video- based scenarios, 
with a large screen set up at one end of a room where a num-
ber of props have been placed to imitate the situation con-
fronting the offi cer, who enters the scene armed with a gun 
that has been modifi ed to interact with the video.
Lieutenant Catherine Johnson of the Minneapolis Police 
Department describes a couple of such simulations in which 
she has trained:
One was a traffi c stop. The training room had the screen at 
one end and objects around the room— a big blue mailbox, a 
fi re hydrant, a doorway— that you could use for cover in deal-
ing with what was happening on the screen. I remember walk-
ing toward the screen, and the video simulating my coming up 
to the car as I did that, very realistic, and suddenly the trunk 
popped up and a guy with a shotgun  rose out and shot me. 

Avoid Illusions of Knowing ê 129
Which, to this day, every time I go up to a car on a traffi c stop, 
I push down hard on the trunk to make sure it isn’t open. And 
it’s because of that one scenario in the training that I went 
through.
Another fi rearm simulation was a domestic call, and it starts 
where I am approaching the residence and there’s a guy on his 
porch. The instant I show up I see that he has a gun in his 
hand. I order him to drop it, and the fi rst thing he does is turn 
and start walking away. And my thinking at that point is that I 
 can’t shoot this guy in the back, and there’s nobody over there 
that looks to be in danger, so what am I going to do? In the 
time it takes me to pro cess whether or not I should shoot this 
guy, he’s already turned around and shot me. Because my re-
action was slower than his action. Action beats reaction every 
time. That’s one mantra that’s drilled into our minds.22
The fi rearms simulations can play out in a variety of ways 
both deadly and peaceful. There’s not so much a right or 
wrong answer to the situation as there is a complex set of fac-
tors, some of which, like whether the individual on the porch 
has a criminal history, may be known to the offi cer when she 
enters the scene. At the conclusion, the offi cer debriefs with 
her trainer, getting feedback. The exercise isn’t all about tech-
nique, it’s about clear thinking and appropriate refl exes— 
visual and verbal clues to watch for, possible outcomes, being 
clear about the appropriate use of deadly force, and fi nding 
the words after the fact that will account for actions you have 
taken in the urgency of the moment.
Simulation is not perfect. Johnson recounts how offi cers 
are trained to take a gun from an assailant at close quarters, a 
maneuver they practice by role- playing with a fellow offi cer. 
It requires speed and deftness: striking an assailant’s wrist with 
one hand to break his grip while simultaneously wresting the 

Make It Stick ê 130
gun free with the other. It’s a move that offi cers had been in the 
habit of honing through repetition, taking the gun, handing it 
back, taking it again. Until one of their offi cers, on a call in 
the fi eld, took the gun from an assailant and handed it right 
back again. In their mutual astonishment, the offi cer managed 
to reseize the gun and hang onto it. The training regime had 
violated the cardinal rule that you should practice like you 
play, because you will play like you practice.
Sometimes the most powerful feedback for calibrating your 
sense of what you do and don’t know are the mistakes you 
make in the fi eld, assuming you survive them and are recep-
tive to the lesson.23

131
All learners are different, and all ris-
ing to a great place, as Francis Bacon tells us, is by a winding 
stair.1
Consider the story of Bruce Hendry, born in 1942, raised 
on the banks of the Mississippi north of Minneapolis by a 
machinist and a homemaker, just another American kid with 
skinned knees and fi re in the belly to get rich. When we talk 
about self- made men, the story often sounds familiar. This is 
not that story. Bruce Hendry is self- made, but the story is in 
the winding stair, how he found his way, and what it helps us 
understand about differences in how people learn.
The idea that individuals have distinct learning styles has 
been around long enough to become part of the folklore of 
educational practice and an integral part of how many people 
perceive themselves. The underlying premise says that people 
receive and pro cess new information differently: for example, 
6
Get Beyond Learning Styles

Make It Stick ê 132
some learn better from visual materials, and others learn better 
from written text or auditory materials. Moreover, the theory 
holds that people who receive instruction in a manner that is 
not matched to their learning style are at a disadvantage for 
learning.
In this chapter, we acknowledge that everyone has learning 
preferences, but we are not persuaded that you learn better 
when the manner of instruction fi ts those preferences. Yet there 
are other kinds of differences in how people learn that do 
matter. First, the story of Bruce, to help frame our argument.
Active Learning from the Get- Go
Part of the secret to Bruce is his sense, from the earliest age, of 
being the one in charge of Bruce. When he was two his mother, 
Doris, told him he  couldn’t cross the street because a car might 
hit him. Every day, Bruce crossed the street, and every day Do-
ris gave him a spanking. “He was born aggressive,” Doris told 
friends.
At eight he bought a ball of string at a garage sale for a 
dime, cut it up, and sold the pieces for a nickel each. At ten he 
got a paper route. At eleven he added caddying. At twelve he 
stuffed his pocket with $30 in savings, sneaked out of his bed-
room window before dawn with an empty suitcase, and hitch-
hiked 255 miles to Aberdeen, South Dakota. He stocked up 
on Black Cats, cherry bombs, and roman candles, illegal in 
Minnesota, and hitched home before supper. Over the next 
week, Doris  couldn’t fi gure out why all the paperboys  were 
dropping by the  house for a few minutes and leaving. Bruce 
had struck gold, but the paper route supervisor found out and 
tipped off Bruce Se nior. The father told the son if he ever did 
it again he’d get the licking of his life. Bruce repeated the buy-
ing trip the following summer and got the promised licking. 

Get Beyond Learning Styles ê 133
“It was worth it,” he says.2 He was thirteen, and he had 
learned a lesson about high demand and short supply. 
The way Bruce fi gured, rich people  were probably no 
smarter than he was, they just had knowledge he lacked. 
Looking at how he went after the knowledge he sought will 
illustrate some of the learning differences that matter. One, 
of course, is taking charge of your own education, a habit 
with Bruce from age two that he has exhibited through the 
years with remarkable per sis tence. There are other signal 
behaviors. As he throws himself into one scheme after an-
other, he draws lessons that improve his focus and judgment. 
He knits what he learns into mental models of investing, which 
he then uses to size up more complex opportunities and fi nd 
his way through the weeds, plucking the telling details from 
masses of irrelevant information to reach the payoff at the 
end. These behaviors are what psychologists call “rule learn-
ing” and “structure building.” People who as a matter of habit 
extract underlying principles or rules from new experiences 
are more successful learners than those who take their experi-
ences at face value, failing to infer lessons that can be applied 
later in similar situations. Likewise, people who single out 
salient concepts from the less important information they 
encounter in new material and who link these key ideas into a 
mental structure are more successful learners than those who 
cannot separate wheat from chaff and understand how the 
wheat is made into fl our.
When he was barely a teenager, Bruce saw a fl yer advertising 
wooded lots on a lake in central Minnesota. Advised that no 
one ever lost money on real estate, he bought one. Over four 
subsequent summers, with occasional help from his dad, he 
built a  house on it, confronting each step in the pro cess one at 

Make It Stick ê 134
a time, fi guring it out for himself or fi nding someone to show 
him how. To dig the basement, he borrowed a trailer and 
hooked it up to his ’49 Hudson. He paid 50 cents for every 
load his friends excavated, shovel by shovel, and then charged 
the own er of a nearby lot that needed fi ll a dollar for it. He 
learned how to lay block from a friend whose father was in 
the cement business and then laid himself a foundation. He 
learned how to frame the walls from the salesman at the lum-
ber yard. He plumbed the  house and wired it the same way, a 
wide- eyed kid asking around how you do that sort of thing. 
“The electrical inspector disapproved it,” Bruce recalls. “At 
the time, I fi gured it was because they wanted a  union guy to 
do it, so I popped for a  union guy to come up from the Cities 
and redo all my wiring. Looking back, I’m sure what I had 
done was totally dangerous.”
He was nineteen and a university student the summer he 
traded the  house for the down payment on a fourplex in Min-
neapolis. It was a simple premise: four apartments would gen-
erate four checks in the mail, month in and month out. Soon, 
besides his studies at university, he was managing the rental 
property, paying on the mortgage, answering midnight calls 
over broken plumbing, raising rents and losing tenants, trying 
to fi ll vacant units, and pouring in more money. He had learned 
how to parlay a vacant lot into a  house, and a  house into an 
apartment complex, but in the end the lesson proved a sour 
one, yielding more headache than reward. He sold the four-
plex and swore off real estate for the next two de cades.
Out of college, Bruce went to work for Kodak as a micro-
fi lm salesman. In his third year, he was one of fi ve top sales-
men in the country. That was the year he found out how 
much his branch manager was making: less than Bruce made 
as a salesman, if he factored in his company car and expense 
account. It pays better to be a rainmaker than a manager: 

Get Beyond Learning Styles ê 135
another lesson learned, another step up Bruce’s winding stair. 
He quit to join a brokerage fi rm and sell stocks.
From this new vantage point, more lessons: “If I brought a 
dollar into the fi rm in trading commissions, half went to the 
fi rm and half of the remaining half went to the IRS. To make 
real money, I had to focus more on investing my own money 
and less on making sales commissions.” Oops, another lesson: 
investing in stocks is risky. He lost as much investing his own 
money as he earned in commissions selling investments to 
his clients. “You have no control of the down side. If a stock 
drops 50 percent, it has to go up by 100 percent just to break 
even. A hundred percent is a lot harder to make than fi fty is to 
lose!” More knowledge banked. He bided his time, casting his 
eyes about for the insight he was after.
Enter Sam Leppla.
As Bruce tells it, Leppla was just a guy who roamed the 
Minneapolis skyways in those days, from one investment fi rm 
to another, talking deals and giving advice. One day he told 
Bruce about some bonds in a distressed company that  were 
selling for 22 cents on the dollar. “There  were twenty- two 
points of unpaid back interest on these bonds,” Bruce recalls, 
“so when the company came out of bankruptcy, you’d collect 
the back interest— in other words, 100 percent of your invest-
ment cost— and you’d still own a paying bond.” It amounted 
to free money. “I didn’t buy any,” Bruce says. “But I watched 
it, and it worked out exactly like Sam predicted. So, I called 
him up and said, ‘Can you come down and tell me what you’re 
doing?’ ”
Leppla taught Bruce a more complex understanding of the 
relationships between price, supply, demand, and value than 
he’d learned from a suitcase full of fi reworks. Leppla’s modus 
operandi was drawn from the following precept. When a com-
pany runs into trouble, the fi rst claim on its assets belongs not 

Make It Stick ê 136
to its own ers, the shareholders, but to its creditors: the suppli-
ers and bondholders. There’s a pecking order to bonds. Those 
bonds paid fi rst are called se nior bonds. Any residual assets 
after the se nior bonds are paid go to pay off the ju nior bonds. 
Ju nior bonds in a troubled company get cheap if investors 
fear there won’t be enough assets left over to cover their value, 
but investors’ fear, laziness, and ignorance can depress bond 
prices far below the worth of the underlying assets. If you can 
ascertain that actual worth and you know the price of the 
bonds, you can invest with very little risk.
Here was the kind of knowledge Bruce had been seeking.
Florida real estate investment trusts  were distressed at the 
time, so Sam and Bruce started looking into those, buying 
where they could see that the fi re- sale prices signifi cantly dis-
counted the underlying values. “We’d buy these for 5 dollars 
and sell them for 50. Everything we bought made money.” 
They had a good run, but market prices caught up with values, 
and soon they  were in need of another idea.
At the time, eastern railroads  were going bankrupt, and the 
federal government was buying their assets to form Conrail 
and Amtrak. As Bruce tells it, “One day Sam said, ‘Railroads 
go bankrupt every fi fty years and no one knows anything about 
them. They are real complicated and they take years to work 
out.’ So we found a guy who knew about railroads. Barney 
Donahue. Barney was an ex– IRS agent and a railroad buff. If 
you’ve ever met a real railroad buff, they think it, they breathe 
it, they can tell you the weight of the track and they can tell 
you the numbers on the engines. He was one of those guys.”
A central tenet of their investment model was to discover 
more than other investors knew about residual assets and the 
order in which the bonds  were to be honored. Armed with the 
right knowledge, they could cherry- pick the underpriced ju-
nior bonds most likely to be paid off. Donahue checked out 

Get Beyond Learning Styles ê 137
the different railroads and decided that the best one to invest 
in was the Erie Lackawanna, because it had the most modern 
equipment when it fi led for bankruptcy. Hendry, Leppla, and 
Donahue dived in for a closer look. They traveled the entire 
length of the Erie’s track to check its condition. They counted 
the equipment that remained, looked at its condition, and 
checked in Moody’s transportation manuals to calculate val-
ues. “You just do the arithmetic: What’s an engine worth? 
A boxcar? A mile of track?” The Erie had issued fi fteen differ-
ent bonds over its 150 years in operation, and the value of each 
bond was dependent in part on where it stood in se niority 
compared to the others. Bruce’s research turned up a little 
document in which the fi nancial institutions had agreed to the 
sequence in which bonds  were to be paid off when the assets 
 were liquidated. With a fi x on the value of the company’s as-
sets, liabilities, and the bond structure, they knew what each 
class of bonds was worth. Bondholders who hadn’t done this 
homework  were in the dark. Ju nior bonds  were selling at 
steeply discounted prices because they  were so far down the 
food chain that investors doubted they would ever see their 
money. Bruce’s calculations suggested otherwise, and he was 
buying.
It’s a longer story than we have space to tell. A railroad 
bankruptcy is an astonishingly convoluted affair. Bruce com-
mitted himself to understanding the entirety of the pro cess 
better than anybody  else. Then he knocked on doors, chal-
lenged the good- old- boys’ power structure that was manag-
ing the proceedings, and eventually succeeded in getting ap-
pointed by the courts to chair the committee that represented 
the bondholders’ interests in the bankruptcy pro cess. When 
the Erie came out of bankruptcy two years later, he was made 
chairman and CEO of the company. He hired Barney Dona-
hue to run it. Hendry, Donahue, and the board guided the 

Make It Stick ê 138
surviving corporation through the remaining lawsuits, and 
when the dust settled, Bruce’s bonds paid twice face value, 
twenty times what he paid for some of the ju nior bonds he 
had purchased.
The Erie Lackawanna, with all its complexity and David 
versus Goliath qualities, was just the kind of mess that be-
came Bruce Hendry’s bread and butter: fi nding a company in 
trouble, burrowing into its assets and liabilities, reading the 
fi ne print on credit obligations, looking at its industry and 
where things are headed, understanding the litigation pro cess, 
and wading into it armed with a pretty good idea of how 
things  were going to play out.
There are stories of other remarkable conquests. He took 
control of Kaiser Steel, staved off its liquidation, guided it 
out of bankruptcy as CEO, and was awarded 2 percent own-
ership of the new corporation. He interceded in the failure of 
First RepublicBank of Texas and came out the other side with 
a 600 percent return on some of his fi rst investments in the 
company. When manufacturers stopped making railroad box-
cars because they  were in oversupply, Bruce bought a thou-
sand of the last ones built, collected 20 percent on his invest-
ment from lease contracts that the railroads  were bound to 
honor, and then sold the cars a year later when they  were in 
short supply and fetching a handsome price. The story of Hen-
dry’s rise is both familiar and par tic u lar; familiar in the na-
ture of the quest and par tic u lar in the ways Bruce has “gone 
to school” on his ventures, building his own set of rules for 
what makes an investment opportunity attractive, stitching the 
rules into a template, and then fi nding new and different ways 
to apply it.
When he is asked how he accounts for his success, the les-
sons he cites are deceptively simple: go where the competition 
isn’t, dig deep, ask the right questions, see the big picture, take 

Get Beyond Learning Styles ê 139
risks, be honest. But these explanations aren’t very satisfying. 
Behind them is a more interesting story, the one we infer from 
reading between the lines: how he fi gured out what knowl-
edge he needed and how he then went after it; how early set-
backs helped seed the skills of shrewder judgment; and how 
he developed a nose for value where others can only smell 
trouble. His gift for detecting value seems uncanny. His sto-
ries bring to mind the kid who, waking up on his fourth birth-
day to fi nd a big pile of manure in the yard, dances around it 
crying, “I’m pretty sure there’s a pony in there somewhere!”
All people are different, a truism we quickly discern as 
children, comparing ourselves to siblings. It’s evident in grade 
school, on the sports fi eld, in the boardroom. Even if we shared 
Bruce Hendry’s desire and determination, even if we took his 
pointers to heart, how many of us would learn the art of know-
ing which pile had a pony in it? As the story of Bruce makes 
clear, some learning differences matter more than others. But 
which differences? That’s what we’ll explore in the rest of this 
chapter.
One difference that appears to matter a lot is how you see 
yourself and your abilities.
As the maxim goes, “Whether you think you can or you 
think you  can’t, you’re right.” The work of Carol Dweck, de-
scribed in Chapter 7, goes a long way toward validating this 
sentiment. So does a Fortune article of a few years ago that tells 
of a seeming contradiction, the stories of people with dyslexia 
who have become high achievers in business and other fi elds 
despite their learning disabilities. Richard Branson, of Virgin 
Rec ords and Virgin Atlantic Airways, quit school at sixteen to 
start and run businesses now worth billions; Diane Swonk is 
one of the top economic forecasters in the United States; Craig 

Make It Stick ê 140
McCaw is a pioneer of the cellular phone industry; Paul Orfa-
lea founded Kinko’s. These achievers and others, when asked, 
told their stories of overcoming adversity. All had trouble in 
school and with the accepted methods of learning, most  were 
mislabeled low IQ, some  were held back or shunted into 
classes for the mentally retarded, and nearly all  were sup-
ported by parents, tutors, and mentors who believed in them. 
Branson recalled, “At some point, I think I decided that being 
dyslexic was better than being stupid.” There, in a phrase, 
Branson’s personal narrative of exceptionalism.3
The stories we create to understand ourselves become the 
narratives of our lives, explaining the accidents and choices 
that have brought us where we are: what I’m good at, what I 
care about most, and where I’m headed. If you’re among the 
last kids standing on the sidelines as the softball teams are 
chosen up, the way you understand your place in the world 
likely changes a little, shaping your sense of ability and the 
subsequent paths you take.
What you tell yourself about your ability plays a part in 
shaping the ways you learn and perform– how hard you apply 
yourself, for example, or your tolerance for risk- taking and 
your willingness to persevere in the face of diffi culty. But dif-
ferences in skills, and your ability to convert new knowledge 
into building blocks for further learning, also shape your routes 
to success. Your fi nesse at softball, for example, depends on a 
constellation of different skills, like your ability to hit the ball, 
run the bases, and fi eld and throw the ball. Moreover, skill on 
the playing fi eld is not a prerequisite for becoming a star in 
the sport in a different capacity. Many of the best managers 
and coaches in pro sports  were mediocre or poor players but 
happen to be exceptional students of their games. Although 
Tony LaRussa’s career as a baseball player was short and un-
distinguished, he went on to manage ball teams with remark-

Get Beyond Learning Styles ê 141
able success. When he retired, having chalked up six Ameri-
can and National League championships and three World 
Series titles, he was hailed as one of the greatest managers of 
all time.
Each of us has a large basket of resources in the form of 
aptitudes, prior knowledge, intelligence, interests, and sense 
of personal empowerment that shape how we learn and how 
we overcome our shortcomings. Some of these differences 
matter a lot— for example, our ability to abstract underlying 
principles from new experiences and to convert new knowl-
edge into mental structures. Other differences we may think 
count for a lot, for example having a verbal or visual learning 
style, actually don’t.
On any list of differences that matter most for learning, the 
level of language fl uency and reading ability will be at or near 
the top. While some kinds of diffi culties that require increased 
cognitive effort can strengthen learning, not all diffi culties we 
face have that effect. If the additional effort required to over-
come the defi cit does not contribute to more robust learning, 
it’s not desirable. An example is the poor reader who cannot 
hold onto the thread of a text while deciphering individual 
words in a sentence. This is the case with dyslexia, and while 
dyslexia is not the only cause of reading diffi culties, it is one 
of the most common, estimated to affect some 15 percent of 
the population. It results from anomalous neural develop-
ment during pregnancy that interferes with the ability to read 
by disrupting the brain’s capacity to link letters to the sounds 
they make, which is essential for word recognition. People 
don’t get over dyslexia, but with help they can learn to work 
with and around the problems it poses. The most successful 
programs emphasize practice at manipulating phonemes, 

Make It Stick ê 142
building vocabulary, increasing comprehension, and improv-
ing fl uency of reading. Neurologists and psychologists empha-
size the importance of diagnosing dyslexia early and working 
with children before the third grade while the brain is still 
quite plastic and potentially more malleable, enabling the re-
routing of neural circuits.
Dyslexia is far more common among prison inmates than 
the general population, as a result of a series of bad turns that 
often begin when children who  can’t read fall into a pattern 
of failure in school and develop low self- esteem. Some of 
them turn to bullying or other forms of antisocial behavior to 
compensate, and this strategy, if left unaddressed, can escalate 
into criminality.
While it is diffi cult for learners with dyslexia to gain essen-
tial reading skills and this disadvantage can create a constel-
lation of other learning diffi culties, the high achievers inter-
viewed for the Fortune article argue that some people with 
dyslexia seem to possess, or to develop, a greater capacity for 
creativity and problem solving, whether as a result of their 
neural wiring or the necessity they face to fi nd ways to com-
pensate for their disability. To succeed, many of those inter-
viewed reported that they had to learn at an early age how to 
grasp the big picture rather than struggling to decipher the 
component parts, how to think outside the box, how to act 
strategically, and how to manage risk taking— skills of neces-
sity that, once learned, gave them a decided leg up later in 
their careers. Some of these skills may indeed have a neuro-
logical basis. Experiments by Gadi Geiger and Jerome Lettvin 
at Massachusetts Institute of Technology have found that in-
dividuals with dyslexia do poorly at interpreting information 
in their visual fi eld of focus when compared to those without 
dyslexia. However, they signifi cantly outperform others in their 
ability to interpret information from their peripheral  vision, 

Get Beyond Learning Styles ê 143
suggesting that a superior ability to grasp the big picture 
might have its origins in the brain’s synaptic wiring.4
There’s an enormous body of literature on dyslexia, which 
we won’t delve into  here beyond acknowledging that some 
neurological differences can count for a lot in how we learn, 
and for some subset of these individuals, a combination of 
high motivation, focused and sustained personal support, and 
compensating skills or “intelligences” have enabled them to 
thrive.
Belief in the learning styles credo is pervasive. Assessing stu-
dents’ learning styles has been recommended at all levels of 
education, and teachers are urged to offer classroom material 
in many different ways so that each student can take it in the 
way he or she is best equipped to learn it. Learning styles 
theory has taken root in management development, as well as 
in vocational and professional settings, including the training 
of military pi lots, health care workers, municipal police, and 
beyond. A report on a 2004 survey conducted for Britain’s 
Learning and Skills Research Centre compares more than sev-
enty distinct learning styles theories currently being offered in 
the marketplace, each with its companion assessment instru-
ments to diagnose a person’s par tic u lar style. The report’s au-
thors characterize the purveyors of these instruments as an 
industry bedev iled by vested interests that tout “a bedlam of 
contradictory claims” and express concerns about the temp-
tation to classify, label, and ste reo type individuals. The au-
thors relate an incident at a conference where a student who 
had completed an assessment instrument reported back: “I 
learned that I was a low auditory, kinesthetic learner. So 
there’s no point in me reading a book or listening to anyone 
for more than a few minutes.”5 The wrongheadedness of this 

Make It Stick ê 144
conclusion is manifold. It’s not supported by science, and it 
instills a corrosive, misguided sense of diminished potential.
Notwithstanding the sheer number and variety of learning 
styles models, if you narrow the fi eld to those that are most 
widely accepted you still fail to fi nd a consistent theoretical 
pattern. An approach called VARK, advocated by Neil Flem-
ing, differentiates people according to whether they prefer to 
learn through experiences that are primarily visual, auditory, 
reading, or kinesthetic (i.e., moving, touching, and active ex-
ploration). According to Fleming, VARK describes only one 
aspect of a person’s learning style, which in its entirety consists 
of eigh teen different dimensions, including preferences in tem-
perature, light, food intake, biorhythms, and working with 
others versus working alone.
Other learning styles theories and materials are based on 
rather different dimensions. One commonly used inventory, 
based on the work of Kenneth Dunn and Rita Dunn, assesses 
six different aspects of an individual’s learning style: environ-
mental, emotional, so cio log i cal, perceptual, physiological, and 
psychological. Still other models assess styles along such di-
mensions as these:
• Concrete versus abstract styles of perceiving
• Active experimentation versus refl ective observation 
modes of pro cessing
• Random versus sequential styles of or ga niz ing
The Honey and Mumford Learning Styles Questionnaire, 
which is pop u lar in managerial settings, helps employees deter-
mine whether their styles are predominantly “activist,” “refl ec-
tor,” “theorist,” or “pragmatist” and to improve in the areas 
where they score low so as to become more versatile learners.
The simple fact that different theories embrace such wildly 
discrepant dimensions gives cause for concern about their 

Get Beyond Learning Styles ê 145
scientifi c underpinnings. While it’s true that most all of us 
have a decided preference for how we like to learn new mate-
rial, the premise behind learning styles is that we learn better 
when the mode of pre sen ta tion matches the par tic u lar style in 
which an individual is best able to learn. That is the critical 
claim.
In 2008 the cognitive psychologists Harold Pashler, Mark 
McDaniel, Doug Rohrer, and Bob Bjork  were commissioned 
to conduct a review to determine whether this critical claim is 
supported by scientifi c evidence. The team set out to answer 
two questions. First, what forms of evidence are needed for 
institutions to justify basing their instructional styles on assess-
ments of students’ or employees’ learning styles? For the results 
to be credible, the team determined that a study would need 
to have several attributes. Initially, students must be divided 
into groups according to their learning styles. Then they must 
be randomly assigned to different classrooms teaching the 
same material but offering it through different instructional 
methods. Afterward, all the students must take the same test. 
The test must show that students with a par tic u lar learning 
style (e.g., visual learners) did the best when they received in-
struction in their own learning style (visual) relative to instruc-
tion in a different style (auditory); in addition, the other types 
of learners must be shown to profi t more from their style of 
instruction than another style (auditory learners learning bet-
ter from auditory than from visual pre sen ta tion).
The second question the team asked was whether this kind 
of evidence existed. The answer was no. They found very few 
studies designed to be capable of testing the validity of learn-
ing styles theory in education, and of those, they found that 
virtually none validate it and several fl atly contradict it. More-
over, their review showed that it is more important that the 
mode of instruction match the nature of the subject being 

Make It Stick ê 146
taught: visual instruction for geometry and geography, verbal 
instruction for poetry, and so on. When instructional style 
matches the nature of the content, all learners learn better, 
regardless of their differing preferences for how the material 
is taught.
The fact that the evidence is not there to validate learning 
styles theory  doesn’t mean that all theories are wrong. Learning 
styles theories take many forms. Some may be valid. But if so, 
we  can’t know which: because the number of rigorous studies 
is extremely small, the research base does not exist to answer 
the question. On the basis of their fi ndings, Pashler and his col-
leagues argued that the evidence currently available does not 
justify the huge investment of time and money that would be 
needed to assess students and restructure instruction around 
learning styles. Until such evidence is produced, it makes more 
sense to emphasize the instructional techniques, like those out-
lined in this book, that have been validated by research as ben-
efi ting learners regardless of their style preferences.6
Successful Intelligence
Intelligence is a learning difference that we do know matters, 
but what exactly is it? Every human society has a concept that 
corresponds to the idea of intelligence in our culture. The 
problem of how to defi ne and mea sure intelligence in a way 
that accounts for people’s intellectual  horse power and pro-
vides a fair indicator of their potential has been with us for 
over a hundred years, with psychologists trying to mea sure 
this construct since early in the twentieth century. Psycholo-
gists today generally accept that individuals possess at least 
two kinds of intelligence. Fluid intelligence is the ability to 
reason, see relationships, think abstractly, and hold informa-

Get Beyond Learning Styles ê 147
tion in mind while working on a problem; crystallized intel-
ligence is one’s accumulated knowledge of the world and the 
procedures or mental models one has developed from past 
learning and experience. Together, these two kinds of intelli-
gence enable us to learn, reason, and solve problems.7
Traditionally, IQ tests have been used to mea sure individ-
uals’ logical and verbal potential. These tests assign an Intel-
ligence Quotient, which denotes the ratio of mental age to 
physical age, times 100. That is, an eight- year- old who can 
solve problems on a test that most ten- year- olds can solve has 
an IQ of 125 (10 divided by 8, times 100). It used to be thought 
that IQ was fi xed from birth, but traditional notions of intel-
lectual capacity are being challenged.
One countervailing idea, put forward by the psychologist 
Howard Gardner to account for the broad variety in people’s 
abilities, is the hypothesis that humans have as many as eight 
different kinds of intelligence:
Logical- mathematical intelligence: ability to think critically, 
work with numbers and abstractions, and the like;
Spatial intelligence: three- dimensional judgment and the 
ability to visualize with the mind’s eye;
Linguistic intelligence: ability to work with words and 
languages;
Kinesthetic intelligence: physical dexterity and control of 
one’s body;
Musical intelligence: sensitivity to sounds, rhythms, tones, 
and music;
Interpersonal intelligence: ability to “read” other people and 
work with them effectively;
Intrapersonal intelligence: ability to understand one’s self 
and make accurate judgments of one’s knowledge, abilities, and 
effectiveness;

Make It Stick ê 148
Naturalistic intelligence: the ability to discriminate and re-
late to one’s natural surroundings (for example, the kinds of 
intelligence invoked by a gardener, hunter, or chef).
Gardner’s ideas are attractive for many reasons, not the 
least because they attempt to explain human differences that 
we can observe but cannot account for with modern, Western 
defi nitions of intelligence with their focus on language and 
logic abilities. As with learning styles theory, the multiple in-
telligences model has helped educators to diversify the kinds 
of learning experiences they offer. Unlike learning styles, which 
can have the perverse effect of causing individuals to perceive 
their learning abilities as limited, multiple intelligences theory 
elevates the sheer variety of tools in our native toolkit. What 
both theories lack is an underpinning of empirical validation, 
a problem Gardner himself recognizes, acknowledging that 
determining one’s par tic u lar mix of intelligences is more an 
art than a science.8
While Gardner helpfully expands our notion of intelligence, 
the psychologist Robert J. Sternberg helpfully distills it again. 
Rather than eight intelligences, Sternberg’s model proposes 
three: analytical, creative, and practical. Further, unlike Gard-
ner’s theory, Sternberg’s is supported by empirical research.9
One of Sternberg’s studies of par tic u lar interest to the ques-
tion of how we mea sure intelligence was carried out in rural 
Kenya, where he and his associates looked at children’s in-
formal knowledge of herbal medicines. Regular use of these 
medicines is an important part of Kenyans’ daily lives. This 
knowledge is not taught in schools or assessed by tests, but 
children who can identify the herbs and who know their ap-
propriate uses and dosages are better adapted to succeed in 
their environment than children without that knowledge. The 
children who performed best on tests of this indigenous infor-
mal knowledge did worst relative to their peers on tests of the 

Get Beyond Learning Styles ê 149
formal academic subjects taught in school and, in Sternberg’s 
words, appeared to be “stupid” by the metric of the formal 
tests. How to reconcile the discrepancy? Sternberg suggests 
that the children who excelled at indigenous knowledge came 
from families who valued such practical knowledge more 
highly than the families of the children who excelled at the 
academics taught in school. Children whose environments 
prized one kind of learning over another (practical over aca-
demic, in the case of the families who taught their children 
about herbs)  were at a lower level of knowledge in the aca-
demic areas not emphasized by their environment. Other fami-
lies placed more value on the analytic (school- based) informa-
tion and less on the practical herbal knowledge.
There are two important ideas  here. First, traditional mea-
sures of intelligence failed to account for environmental dif-
ferences; there is no reason to suspect that kids who excelled 
at informal, indigenous knowledge  can’t catch up to or even 
surpass their peers in academic learning when given the ap-
propriate opportunities. Second, for the kids whose environ-
ments emphasized indigenous knowledge, the mastery of aca-
demics is still developing. In Sternberg’s view,  we’re all in a 
state of developing expertise, and any test that mea sures 
only what we know at any given moment is a static mea sure 
that tells us nothing about our potential in the realm the test 
mea sures.
Two other quick stories Sternberg cites are useful  here. 
One is a series of studies of orphaned children in Brazil who 
must learn to start and run street businesses if they are to sur-
vive. Motivation is high; if they turn to theft as a means to 
sustain themselves, they risk running afoul of the death squads. 
These children, who are doing the math required in order to 
run successful businesses, cannot do the same math when 
the problems are presented in an abstract, paper- and- pencil 

Make It Stick ê 150
format. Sternberg argues that this result makes sense when 
viewed from the standpoint of developing expertise: the chil-
dren live in an environment that emphasizes practical skills, 
not academic, and it’s the practical exigencies that determine 
the substance and form of the learning.10
The other story is about seasoned, expert handicappers at 
 horse tracks who devise highly complex mental models for 
betting on  horses but who mea sure only average on standard 
IQ tests. Their handicapping models  were tested against those 
devised by less expert handicappers with equivalent IQs. 
Handicapping requires comparing  horses against a long list of 
variables for each  horse, such as its lifetime earnings, its life-
time speed, the races where it came in the money, the ability 
of its jockey in the current race, and a dozen characteristics of 
each of its prior races. Just to predict the speed with which a 
 horse would run the fi nal quarter mile, the experts relied on 
a complex mental model involving as many as seven vari-
ables. The study found that IQ is unrelated to handicapping 
ability, and “what ever it is that an IQ test mea sures, it is not 
the ability to engage in cognitively complex forms of multi-
variate reasoning.”11
Into this void Robert Sternberg has introduced his three- 
part theory of successful intelligence. Analytical intelligence is 
our ability to complete problem- solving tasks such as those 
typically contained in tests; creative intelligence is our ability to 
synthesize and apply existing knowledge and skills to deal with 
new and unusual situations; practical intelligence is our ability 
to adapt to everyday life— to understand what needs to be done 
in a specifi c setting and then do it; what we call street smarts. 
Different cultures and learning situations draw on these intel-
ligences differently, and much of what’s required to succeed in 
a par tic u lar situation is not mea sured by standard IQ or apti-
tude tests, which can miss critical competencies.

Get Beyond Learning Styles ê 151
Dynamic Testing
Robert Sternberg and Elena Grigorenko have proposed the 
idea of using testing to assess ability in a dynamic manner. 
Sternberg’s concept of developing expertise holds that with 
continued experience in a fi eld we are always moving from a 
lower state of competence to a higher one. His concept also 
holds that standardized tests  can’t accurately rate our poten-
tial because what they reveal is limited to a static report of 
where we are on the learning continuum at the time the test is 
given. In tandem with Sternberg’s three- part model of intelli-
gence, he and Grigorenko have proposed a shift away from 
static tests and replacing them with what they call dynamic 
testing: determining the state of one’s expertise; refocusing 
learning on areas of low per for mance; follow- up testing to 
mea sure the improvement and to refocus learning so as to 
keep raising expertise. Thus, a test may assess a weakness, but 
rather than assuming that the weakness indicates a fi xed in-
ability, you interpret it as a lack of skill or knowledge that can 
be remedied. Dynamic testing has two advantages over stan-
dard testing. It focuses the learner and teacher on areas that 
need to be brought up rather than on areas of accomplish-
ment, and the ability to mea sure a learner’s progress from one 
test to the next provides a truer gauge of his or her learning 
potential.
Dynamic testing does not assume one must adapt to some 
kind of fi xed learning limitation but offers an assessment of 
where one’s knowledge or per for mance stands on some dimen-
sion and how one needs to move forward to succeed: what do 
I need to learn in order to improve? That is, where aptitude 
tests and much of learning styles theory tend to emphasize 
our strengths and encourage us to focus on them, dynamic 
testing helps us to discover our weaknesses and correct them. 

Make It Stick ê 152
In the school of life experience, setbacks show us where we 
need to do better. We can steer clear of similar challenges in 
the future, or we can redouble our efforts to master them, 
broadening our capacities and expertise. Bruce Hendry’s ex-
periences investing in rental property and in the stock market 
dealt him setbacks, and the lessons he took away  were essen-
tial elements of his education: to be skeptical when somebody’s 
trying to sell him something, to fi gure out the right questions, 
and to learn how to go dig out the answers. That’s developing 
expertise.
Dynamic testing has three steps.
Step 1: a test of some kind— perhaps an experience or a 
paper exam— shows me where I come up short in knowl-
edge or a skill.
Step 2: I dedicate myself to becoming more competent, us-
ing refl ection, practice, spacing, and the other techniques 
of effective learning.
Step 3: I test myself again, paying attention to what works 
better now but also, and especially, to where I still need 
more work.
When we take our fi rst steps as toddlers, we are engaging 
in dynamic testing. When you write your fi rst short story, put 
it in front of your writers’ group for feedback, and then revise 
and bring it back, you’re engaging in dynamic testing, learn-
ing the writer’s craft and getting a sense of your potential. The 
upper limits of your per for mance in any cognitive or manual 
skill may be set by factors beyond your control, such as your 
intelligence and the natural limits of your ability, but most of 
us can learn to perform nearer to our full potential in most 
areas by discovering our weaknesses and working to bring 
them up.12

Get Beyond Learning Styles ê 153
Structure Building
There do appear to be cognitive differences in how we learn, 
though not the ones recommended by advocates of learning 
styles. One of these differences is the idea mentioned earlier 
that psychologists call structure building: the act, as we en-
counter new material, of extracting the salient ideas and con-
structing a coherent mental framework out of them. These 
frameworks are sometimes called mental models or mental 
maps. High structure- builders learn new material better than 
low structure- builders. The latter have diffi culty setting aside 
irrelevant or competing information, and as a result they tend 
to hang on to too many concepts to be condensed into a work-
able model (or overall structure) that can serve as a founda-
tion for further learning.
The theory of structure building bears some resemblance to 
a village built of Lego blocks. Suppose you’re taking a survey 
course in a new subject. You start with a textbook full of ideas, 
and you set out to build a coherent mental model of the knowl-
edge they contain. In our Lego analogy, you start with a box 
full of Lego pieces, and you set out to build the town that’s 
pictured on the box cover. You dump out the pieces and sort 
them into a handful of piles. First you lay out the streets and 
sidewalks that defi ne the perimeter of the city and the distinct 
places within it. Then you sort the remaining pieces according 
to the elements they compose: apartment complex, school, hos-
pital, stadium, mall, fi re station. Each of these elements is like a 
central idea in the textbook, and each takes more shape and 
nuance as added pieces snap into place. Together, these central 
ideas form the larger structure of the village.
Now suppose that your brother has used this Lego set be-
fore and dumped some pieces into the box from another set. 

Make It Stick ê 154
As you fi nd pieces, some might not fi t with your building 
blocks, and you can put them aside as extraneous. Or you 
may discover that some of the new pieces can be used to form 
a substructure of an existing building block, giving it more 
depth and defi nition (porches, patios, and back decks as sub-
structures of apartments; streetlights, hydrants, and boule-
vard trees as substructures of streets). You happily add these 
pieces to your village, even though the original designers of 
the set had not planned on this sort of thing. High structure- 
builders develop the skill to identify foundational concepts 
and their key building blocks and to sort new information 
based on whether it adds to the larger structure and one’s 
knowledge or is extraneous and can be put aside. By contrast, 
low structure- builders struggle in fi guring out and sticking 
with an overarching structure and knowing what information 
needs to fi t into it and what ought to be discarded. Structure 
building is a form of conscious and subconscious discipline: 
stuff fi ts or it  doesn’t; it adds nuance, capacity and meaning, 
or it obscures and overfreights.
A simpler analogy might be a friend who wants to tell you 
a rare story about this four- year- old boy she knows: she men-
tions who the mother is, how they became friends in their 
book club, fi nally mentioning that the mother, by coincidence, 
had a large load of manure delivered for her garden on the 
morning of the boy’s birthday— the mother’s an incredible 
gardener, her eggplants took a ribbon at the county fair and 
got her an interview on morning radio, and she gets her ma-
nure from that widowed guy in your church who raises the 
Clydesdale  horses and whose son is married to— and so on 
and so on. Your friend cannot winnow the main ideas from 
the blizzard of irrelevant associations, and the story is lost on 
the listener. Story, too, is structure.

Get Beyond Learning Styles ê 155
Our understanding of structure building as a cognitive dif-
ference in learning is still in the early stages: is low structure- 
building the result of a faulty cognitive mechanism, or is 
structure- building a skill that some pick up naturally and 
others must be taught? We know that when questions are 
embedded in texts to help focus readers on the main ideas, the 
learning per for mance of low structure- builders improves to a 
level commensurate with high structure- builders. The embed-
ded questions promote a more coherent repre sen ta tion of the 
text than low- structure readers can build on their own, thus 
bringing them up toward the level achieved by the high 
structure- builders.
What’s happening in this situation remains an open ques-
tion for now, but the implication for learners seems to rein-
force a notion offered earlier by the neurosurgeon Mike Eber-
sold and the pediatric neurologist Doug Larsen: that cultivating 
the habit of refl ecting on one’s experiences, of making them 
into a story, strengthens learning. The theory of structure 
building may provide a clue as to why: that refl ecting on what 
went right, what went wrong, and how might I do it differ-
ently next time helps me isolate key ideas, or ga nize them into 
mental models, and apply them again in the future with an 
eye to improving and building on what I’ve learned.13
Rule versus Example Learning
Another cognitive difference that appears to matter is whether 
you are a “rule learner” or “example learner,” and the dis-
tinction is somewhat akin to the one we just discussed. When 
studying different kinds of problems in a chemistry class, or 
specimens in a course on birds and how to identify them, rule 
learners tend to abstract the underlying principles or “rules” 

Make It Stick ê 156
that differentiate the examples being studied. Later, when they 
encounter a new chemistry problem or bird specimen, they 
apply the rules as a means to classify it and select the appro-
priate solution or specimen box. Example learners tend to 
memorize the examples rather than the underlying principles. 
When they encounter an unfamiliar case, they lack a grasp of 
the rules needed to classify or solve it, so they generalize from 
the nearest example they can remember, even if it is not par-
ticularly relevant to the new case. However, example learners 
may improve at extracting underlying rules when they are 
asked to compare two different examples rather than focus 
on studying one example at a time. Likewise, they are more 
likely to discover the common solution to disparate problems 
if they fi rst have to compare the problems and try to fi gure 
out the underlying similarities.
By way of an illustration, consider two different hypo-
thetical problems faced by a learner. These are taken from 
research into rule learning. In one problem, a general’s forces 
are set to attack a castle that is protected by a moat. Spies 
have learned that the bridges over the moat have been mined 
by the castle’s commander. The mines are set to allow small 
groups to cross the bridges, so that the occupants of the cas-
tle can retrieve food and fuel. How can the general get a large 
force over the bridges to attack the castle without tripping 
the mines?
The other problem involves an inoperable tumor, which 
can be destroyed by focused radiation. However, the radiation 
must also pass through healthy tissue. A beam of suffi cient 
intensity to destroy the tumor will damage the healthy tissue 
through which it passes. How can the tumor be destroyed 
without damaging healthy tissue?
In the studies, students have diffi culty fi nding the solution 
to either of these problems unless they are instructed to look 

Get Beyond Learning Styles ê 157
for similarities between them. When seeking similarities, many 
students notice that (1) both problems require a large force to 
be directed at a target, (2) the full force cannot be massed and 
delivered through a single route without an adverse outcome, 
and (3) smaller forces can be delivered to the target, but a 
small force is insuffi cient to solve the problem. By identifying 
these similarities, students often arrive at a strategy of divid-
ing the larger force into smaller forces and sending these in 
through different routes to converge on the target and destroy 
it without setting off mines or damaging healthy tissue.  Here’s 
the payoff: after fi guring out this common, underlying solution, 
students are then able to go on to solve a variety of different 
convergence problems.14
As with high and low structure-builders, our understand-
ing of rule versus example learners is very preliminary. How-
ever, we know that high structure-builders and rule learners 
are more successful in transferring their learning to unfamiliar 
situations than are low structure-builders and example learn-
ers. You might wonder if the tendency to be a high structure-
builder is correlated with the tendency to be a rule learner. 
Unfortunately, research is not yet available to answer this 
question.
You can see the development of structure- building and 
rule- learning skills in a child’s ability to tell a joke. A three- 
year- old probably cannot deliver a knock- knock joke, because 
he lacks an understanding of structure. You reply “Who’s 
there?” and he jumps to the punch line: “Door is locked, I  can’t 
get in!” He  doesn’t understand the importance, after “Who’s 
there?”, of replying “Doris” to set up the joke. But by the 
time he’s fi ve, he has become a knock- knock virtuoso: he has 
memorized the structure. Nonetheless, at fi ve he’s not yet 
adept at other kinds of jokes because he hasn’t yet learned 
the essential element that makes jokes work, which, of course, 

Make It Stick ê 158
is the “rule” that a punch line of any kind needs a setup, 
 explicit or implied.15
If you consider Bruce Hendry’s early lesson in the high value 
of a suitcase full of scarce fi reworks, you can see how, when 
he looks at boxcars many years later, he’s working with the 
same supply- and- demand building block, but within a much 
more complex model that employs other blocks of knowledge 
that he has constructed over the years to address concepts of 
credit risk, business cycles, and the pro cesses of bankruptcy. 
Why are boxcars in surplus? Because tax incentives to inves-
tors had encouraged too much money to fl ow into their pro-
duction. What’s a boxcar worth? They cost $42,000 each to 
build and  were in like- new condition, as they had been some 
of the last ones built. He researched the lifespan of a boxcar 
and its scrap value and looked at the lease contracts. Even if 
all his cars stood idle, the lease payments would pay a pretty 
yield on his investment while the glut worked through the 
system and the market turned around.
Had we been there, we would have bought boxcars, too. 
Or so we’d like to think. But it’s not like fi lling a satchel with 
fi reworks, even if the underlying principle of supply and de-
mand is the same. You had to buy the boxcars right, and under-
stand the way to go about it. What in lay terms we call know-
how. Knowledge is not knowhow until you understand the 
underlying principles at work and can fi t them together into a 
structure larger than the sum of its parts. Knowhow is learn-
ing that enables you to go do.
The Takeaway
Given what we know about learning differences, what’s the 
takeaway?

Get Beyond Learning Styles ê 159
Be the one in charge.   There’s an old truism from sales school 
that says you  can’t shoot a deer from the lodge. The same 
goes for learning: you have to suit up, get out the door, and 
fi nd what you’re after. Mastery, especially of complex ideas, 
skills, and pro cesses, is a quest. It is not a grade on a test, 
something bestowed by a coach, or a quality that simply seeps 
into your being with old age and gray hair.
Embrace the notion of successful intelligence.   Go wide: don’t 
roost in a pigeonhole of your preferred learning style but take 
command of your resources and tap all of your “intelligences” 
to master the knowledge or skill you want to possess. De-
scribe what you want to know, do, or accomplish. Then list 
the competencies required, what you need to learn, and where 
you can fi nd the knowledge or skill. Then go get it.
Consider your expertise to be in a state of continuing de-
velopment, practice dynamic testing as a learning strategy to 
discover your weaknesses, and focus on improving yourself 
in those areas. It’s smart to build on your strengths, but you 
will become ever more competent and versatile if you also use 
testing and trial and error to continue to improve in the areas 
where your knowledge or per for mance are not pulling their 
weight.
Adopt active learning strategies like retrieval practice, spac-
ing, and interleaving. Be aggressive. Like those with dyslexia 
who have become high achievers, develop workarounds 
or  compensating skills for impediments or holes in your 
aptitudes.
Don’t rely on what feels best: like a good pi lot checking his 
instruments, use quizzing, peer review, and the other tools 
described in Chapter 5 to make sure your judgment of what 
you know and can do is accurate, and that your strategies are 
moving you toward your goals.

Make It Stick ê 160
Don’t assume that you’re doing something wrong if the 
learning feels hard. Remember that diffi culties you can over-
come with greater cognitive effort will more than repay you 
in the depth and durability of your learning.
Distill the underlying principles; build the structure.   If you’re 
an example learner, study examples two at a time or more, 
rather than one by one, asking yourself in what ways they 
are alike and different. Are the differences such that they re-
quire different solutions, or are the similarities such that they 
respond to a common solution?
Break your idea or desired competency down into its com-
ponent parts. If you think you are a low structure-builder or 
an example learner trying to learn new material, pause peri-
odically and ask what the central ideas are, what the rules are. 
Describe each idea and recall the related points. Which are 
the big ideas, and which are supporting concepts or nuances? 
If you  were to test yourself on the main ideas, how would you 
describe them?
What kind of scaffold or framework can you imagine that 
holds these central ideas together? If we borrowed the wind-
ing stair meta phor as a structure for Bruce Hendry’s invest-
ment model, it might work something like this. Spiral stairs 
have three parts: a center post, treads, and risers. Let’s say the 
center post is the thing that connects us from where we are 
(down  here) to where we want to be (up there): it’s the invest-
ment opportunity. Each tread is an element of the deal that 
protects us from losing money and dropping back, and each 
riser is an element that lifts us up a notch. Treads and risers 
must both be present for the stairs to function and for a deal 
to be attractive. Knowing the scrap value of boxcars is a 
tread— Bruce knows he won’t get less than that for his invest-
ment. Another tread is the guaranteed lease income while his 

Get Beyond Learning Styles ê 161
capital is tied up. What are some risers? Impending scarcity, 
which will raise values. The like- new condition of the cars, which 
is latent value. A deal that  doesn’t have treads and risers will 
not protect the downside or reliably deliver the upside.
Structure is all around us and available to us through the 
poet’s medium of meta phor. A tree, with its roots, trunk, and 
branches. A river. A village, encompassing streets and blocks, 
 houses and stores and offi ces. The structure of the village ex-
plains how these elements are interconnected so that the village 
has a life and a signifi cance that would not exist if these ele-
ments  were scattered randomly across an empty landscape.
By abstracting the underlying rules and piecing them into a 
structure, you go for more than knowledge. You go for know-
how. And that kind of mastery will put you ahead.

162
In a famous study from the 1970s, a re-
searcher showed nursery school children one at a time into a 
room with no distractions except for a marshmallow resting 
on a tray on a desk. As the researcher left the room, the child 
was told he could eat the marshmallow now, or, if he waited 
for fi fteen minutes, he would be rewarded with a second 
marshmallow.
Walter Mischel and his graduate students observed through 
a mirror as the children faced their dilemma. Some popped the 
marshmallow into their mouths the moment the researcher 
left, but others  were able to wait. To help themselves hold 
back, these kids tried anything they could think of. They  were 
observed to “cover their eyes with their hands or turn around 
so that they  can’t see the tray, start kicking the desk, or tug on 
their pigtails, or stroke the marshmallow as if it  were a tiny 
stuffed animal,” the researchers wrote.
7
Increase Your Abilities

Increase Your Abilities ê 163
Of more than six hundred children who took part in the 
experiment, only one- third succeeded in resisting temptation 
long enough to get the second marshmallow.
A series of follow- up studies, the most recent in 2011, 
found that the nursery school children who had been more 
successful in delaying gratifi cation in this exercise grew up to 
be more successful in school and in their careers.
The marshmallow study is sublime in its simplicity and as 
a meta phor for life. We are born with the gift of our genes, 
but to a surprising degree our success is also determined by 
focus and self- discipline, which are the offspring of motiva-
tion and one’s sense of personal empowerment.1
Consider James Paterson, a spirited, thirty- something Welsh-
man, and his unwitting seduction by the power of mnemonic 
devices and the world of memory competitions. The word 
“mnemonic” is from the Greek word for memory. Mnemonic 
devices are mental tools that can take many forms but gener-
ally are used to help hold a large volume of new material in 
memory, cued for ready recall.
James fi rst learned of mnemonics when one of his univer-
sity instructors fl eetingly mentioned their utility during a 
lecture. He went straight home, searched the web, bought a 
book. If he could learn these techniques, he fi gured, he could 
memorize his classwork in short order and have a lot more 
time to hang out with friends. He started practicing memoriz-
ing things: names and dates for his psychology classes and the 
textbook page numbers where they  were cited. He also prac-
ticed parlor tricks, like memorizing the sequence of playing 
cards in a shuffl ed deck or strings of random numbers read 
from lists made up by friends. He spent long hours honing his 
techniques, becoming adept and the life of the party among 
his social set. The year was 2006, and when he learned of a 
memory competition to be held in Cambridge, En gland, he 

Make It Stick ê 164
decided on a lark to enter it. There he surprised himself by 
taking fi rst place in the beginner category, a per for mance for 
which he pocketed a cool 1,000 euros. He was hooked. Figur-
ing he had nothing to lose by taking a fl yer, he went on to com-
pete in his fi rst World Memory Championships, in London, 
that same year.
With mnemonics James had fi gured to pocket some easy 
facts to ace his exams without spending the time and effort to 
fully master the material, but he discovered something en-
tirely different, as we will recount shortly.
Memory athletes, as these competitors call themselves, all 
get their start in different ways. Nelson Dellis, the 2012 US 
Memory Champion, began after his grandmother died of Alz-
heimer’s disease. Nelson watched her decline over time, with 
her ability to remember being the fi rst cognitive faculty to go. 
Although only in his twenties, Nelson wondered if he  were 
destined for the same fate and what he could do about it. He 
discovered mind sports, hoping that if he could develop his 
memory to great capacity, then he might have reserves if the 
disease did strike him later in life. Nelson is another memory 
athlete on his way up, and he has started a Foundation, Climb 
for Memory, to raise awareness about and funds for research 
for this terrible disease. Nelson also climbs mountains (twice 
reaching near the summit of Mt. Everest), hence the name. We 
meet others in this chapter who, like Paterson and Dellis, have 
sought successfully to raise their cognitive abilities in one way 
or another.
The brain is remarkably plastic, to use the term applied in 
neuroscience, even into old age for most people. In this chap-
ter’s discussion of raising intellectual abilities, we review some 
of the questions science is trying to answer about the brain’s 

Increase Your Abilities ê 165
ability to change itself throughout life and people’s ability to 
infl uence those changes and to raise their IQs. We then de-
scribe three known cognitive strategies for getting more out 
of the mental  horse power you’ve already got.
In a sense the infant brain is like the infant nation. When 
John Fremont arrived with his expeditionary force at Pueblo 
de Los Angeles in 1846 in the US campaign to take western 
territory from Mexico, he had no way to report his progress 
to President James Polk in Washington except to send his 
scout, Kit Carson, across the continent on his mule— a round- 
trip of nearly six thousand miles over mountains, deserts, wil-
derness and prairies. Fremont pressed Carson to whip himself 
into a lather, not even to stop to shoot game along the way 
but to sustain himself by eating the mules as they broke down 
and needed replacing. That such a journey would be required 
reveals the undeveloped state of the country. The fi ve- foot- 
four- inch, 140- pound Carson was the best we had for getting 
word from one coast to the other. Despite the continent’s 
boundless natural assets, the fl edgling nation had little in the 
way of capability. To become mighty, it would need cities, uni-
versities, factories, farms and seaports, and the roads, trains, 
and telegraph lines to connect them.2
It’s the same with a brain. We come into the world endowed 
with the raw material of our genes, but we become capable 
through the learning and development of mental models and 
neural pathways that enable us to reason, solve, and create. 
We have been raised to think that the brain is hardwired and 
our intellectual potential is more or less set from birth. We 
now know otherwise. Average IQs have risen over the past 
century with changes in living conditions. When people suffer 
brain damage from strokes or accidents, scientists have seen 
the brain somehow reassign duties so that adjacent networks 
of neurons take over the work of damaged areas, enabling 

Make It Stick ê 166
people to regain lost capacities. Competitions between 
“memory athletes” like James Paterson and Nelson Dellis have 
emerged as an international sport among people who have 
trained themselves to perform astonishing acts of recall. Ex-
pert per for mance in medicine, science, music, chess, or sports 
has been shown to be the product not just of innate gifts, as 
had long been thought, but of skills laid down layer by layer, 
through thousands of hours of dedicated practice. In short, 
research and the modern record have shown that we and our 
brains are capable of much greater feats than scientists would 
have thought possible even a few de cades ago.
Neuroplasticity
All knowledge and memory are physiological phenomena, 
held in our neurons and neural pathways. The idea that the 
brain is not hardwired but plastic, mutable, something that 
reorganizes itself with each new task, is a recent revelation, and 
we are just at the frontiers of understanding what it means and 
how it works.
In a helpful review of the neuroscience, John T. Bruer took 
on this question as it relates to the initial development and 
stabilization of the brain’s circuitry and our ability to bolster 
the intellectual ability of our children through early stimula-
tion.  We’re born with about 100 billion nerve cells, called 
neurons. A synapse is a connection between neurons, enabling 
them to pass signals. For a period shortly before and after 
birth, we undergo “an exuberant burst of synapse formation,” 
in which the brain wires itself: the neurons sprout micro-
scopic branches, called axons, that reach out in search of tiny 
nubs on other neurons, called dendrites. When axon meets 
dendrite, a synapse is formed. In order for some axons to fi nd 
their target dendrites they must travel vast distances to com-

Increase Your Abilities ê 167
plete the connections that make up our neural circuitry (a 
journey of such daunting scale and precision that Bruer likens 
it to fi nding one’s way clear across the United States to a wait-
ing partner on the opposite coast, not unlike Kit Carson’s 
mission to President Polk for General Fremont). It’s this cir-
cuitry that enables our senses, cognition, and motor skills, in-
cluding learning and memory, and it is this circuitry that forms 
the possibilities and the limits of one’s intellectual capacity.
The number of synapses peaks at the age of one or two, at 
about 50 percent higher than the average number we possess 
as adults. A plateau period follows that lasts until around 
puberty, whereupon this overabundance begins to decline as 
the brain goes through a period of synaptic pruning. We arrive 
at our adult complement at around age sixteen with a stagger-
ing number, thought to total about 150 trillion connections.
We don’t know why the infant brain produces an over-
abundance of connections or how it subsequently determines 
which ones to prune. Some neuroscientists believe that the 
connections we don’t use are the ones that fade and die away, 
a notion that would seem to manifest the “use it or lose it” 
principle and argue for the early stimulation of as many con-
nections as possible in hopes of retaining them for life. An-
other theory suggests the burgeoning and winnowing is deter-
mined by ge ne tics and we have little or no infl uence over which 
synapses survive and which do not.
“While children’s brains acquire a tremendous amount of 
information during the early years,” the neuroscientist Patri-
cia Goldman- Rakic told the Education Commission of the 
States, most learning is acquired after synaptic formation sta-
bilizes. “From the time a child enters fi rst grade, through high 
school, college, and beyond, there is little change in the num-
ber of synapses. It is during the time when no, or little, syn-
apse formation occurs that most learning takes place” and we 

Make It Stick ê 168
develop adult- level skills in language, mathematics, and logic.3 
And it is likely during this period more than during infancy, in 
the view of the neuroscientist Harry T. Chugani, that experience 
and environmental stimulation fi ne- tune one’s circuits and 
make one’s neuronal architecture unique.4 In a 2011 article, a 
team of British academics in the fi elds of psychology and soci-
ology reviewed the evidence from neuroscience and concluded 
that the architecture and gross structure of the brain appear to 
be substantially determined by genes but that the fi ne structure 
of neural networks appears to be shaped by experience and to 
be capable of substantial modifi cation.5
That the brain is mutable has become evident on many fronts. 
Norman Doidge, in his book The Brain That Changes Itself, 
looks at compelling cases of patients who have overcome severe 
impairments with the assistance of neurologists whose research 
and practice are advancing the frontiers of our understanding 
of neuroplasticity.
One of these was Paul Bach- y-Rita, who pioneered a device 
to help patients who have suffered damage to sensory organs. 
Bach- y-Rita’s device enables them to regain lost skills by 
teaching the brain to respond to stimulation of other parts of 
their bodies, substituting one sensory system for another, 
much as a blind person can learn to navigate through echolo-
cation, learning to “see” her surroundings by interpreting the 
differing sounds from the tap of a cane, or can learn to read 
through the sense of touch using Braille.6
One of Bach- y-Rita’s patients had suffered damage to her 
vestibular system (how the inner ear senses balance and spa-
tial orientation) that had left her so unbalanced that she was 
unable to stand, walk, or maintain her in de pen dence. Bach- 
y-Rita rigged a helmet with carpenters’ levels attached to it 

Increase Your Abilities ê 169
and wired them to send impulses to a postage- stamp- sized 
strip of tape containing 144 microelectrodes placed on the 
woman’s tongue. As she tilted her head, the electrodes spar-
kled on her tongue like effervescence, but in distinctive pat-
terns refl ecting the direction and angle of her head movements. 
Through practice wearing the device, the woman was gradu-
ally able to retrain her brain and vestibular system, recovering 
her sense of balance for longer and longer periods following 
the training sessions.
Another patient, a thirty- fi ve- year- old man who had lost his 
sight at age thirteen, was outfi tted with a small video camera 
mounted on a helmet and enabled to send pulses to the tongue. 
As Bach- y-Rita explained, the eyes are not what sees, the brain 
is. The eyes sense, and the brain interprets. The success of this 
device relies on the brain learning to interpret signals from 
the tongue as sight. The remarkable results  were reported in 
the New York Times: The patient “found doorways, caught 
balls rolling toward him, and with his small daughter played 
a game of rock, paper and scissors for the fi rst time in twenty 
years. [He] said that, with practice, the substituted sense gets 
better, ‘as if the brain  were rewiring itself.’ ”7
In yet another application, interesting in light of our earlier 
discussions of metacognition, stimulators are being attached 
to the chests of pi lots to transmit cockpit instrument readings, 
helping the brain to sense changes in pitch and altitude that 
the pi lot’s vestibular system is unable to detect under certain 
fl ight conditions.
Neural cell bodies make up most of the part of our brains that 
scientists call the gray matter. What they call the white matter 
is made up of the wiring: the axons that connect to dendrites of 
other neural cell bodies, and the waxy myelin sheaths in which 

Make It Stick ê 170
some axons are wrapped, like the plastic coating on a lamp 
cord. Both gray matter and white matter are the subject of 
intense scientifi c study, as we try to understand how the com-
ponents that shape cognition and motor skills work and how 
they change through our lives, research that has been greatly 
advanced by recent leaps in brain imaging technology.
One ambitious effort is the Human Connectome Project, 
funded by the National Institutes of Health, to map the con-
nections in the human brain. (The word “connectome” refers 
to the architecture of the human neurocircuitry in the same 
spirit that “genome” was coined for the map of the human 
ge ne tic code.) The websites of participating research institu-
tions show striking images of the fi ber architecture of the 
brain, masses of wire- like human axons presented in neon 
colors to denote signal directions and bearing an uncanny re-
semblance to the massive wiring harnesses inside 1970s super-
computers. Early research fi ndings are intriguing. One study, at 
the University of California, Los Angeles, compared the syn-
aptic architecture of identical twins, whose genes are alike, 
and fraternal twins, who share only some genes. This study 
showed what others have suggested, that the speed of our men-
tal abilities is determined by the robustness of our neural con-
nections; that this robustness, at the initial stages, is largely 
determined by our genes, but that our neural circuitry does 
not mature as early as our physical development and instead 
continues to change and grow through our forties, fi fties, and 
sixties. Part of the maturation of these connections is the 
gradual thickening of the myelin coating of the axons. My-
elination generally starts at the backs of our brains and moves 
toward the front, reaching the frontal lobes as we grow into 
adulthood. The frontal lobes perform the executive functions 
of the brain and are the location of the pro cesses of high- level 

Increase Your Abilities ê 171
reasoning and judgment, skills that are developed through 
experience.
The thickness of the myelin coating correlates with ability, 
and research strongly suggests that increased practice builds 
greater myelin along the related pathways, improving the 
strength and speed of the electrical signals and, as a result, 
per for mance. Increases in piano practice, for example, have 
shown correlated increases in the myelination of nerve fi bers 
associated with fi nger movements and the cognitive pro cesses 
that are involved in making music, changes that do not ap-
pear in nonmusicians.8
The study of habit formation provides an interesting view 
into neuroplasticity. The neural circuits we use when we take 
conscious action toward a goal are not the same ones we use 
when our actions have become automatic, the result of habit. 
The actions we take by habit are directed from a region lo-
cated deeper in the brain, the basal ganglia. When we engage 
in extended training and repetition of some kinds of learn-
ing, notably motor skills and sequential tasks, our learning 
is thought to be recoded in this deeper region, the same area 
that controls subconscious actions such as eye movements. 
As a part of this pro cess of recoding, the brain is thought to 
chunk motor and cognitive action sequences together so that 
they can be performed as a single unit, that is, without requir-
ing a series of conscious decisions, which would substantially 
slow our responses. These sequences become refl exive. That 
is, they may start as actions we teach ourselves to take in pur-
suit of a goal, but they become automatic responses to stim-
uli. Some researchers have used the word “macro” (a simple 
computer app) to describe how this chunking functions as a 
form of highly effi cient, consolidated learning. These theories 
about chunking as integral to the pro cess of habit formation 

Make It Stick ê 172
help explain the way in sports we develop the ability to re-
spond to the rapid- fi re unfolding of events faster than  we’re 
able to think them through, the way a musician’s fi nger move-
ments can outpace his conscious thoughts, or the way a chess 
player can learn to foresee the countless possible moves and 
implications presented by different confi gurations of the board. 
Most of us display the same talent when we type.
Another fundamental sign of the brain’s enduring mutability 
is the discovery that the hippocampus, where we consolidate 
learning and memory, is able to generate new neurons through-
out life. This phenomenon, called neurogenesis, is thought to 
play a central role in the brain’s ability to recover from physi-
cal injury and in humans’ lifelong ability to learn. The rela-
tionship of neurogenesis to learning and memory is a new fi eld 
of inquiry, but already scientists have shown that the activity 
of associative learning (that is, of learning and remembering 
the relationship between unrelated items, such as names and 
faces) stimulates an increase in the creation of new neurons in 
the hippocampus. This rise in neurogenesis starts before the 
new learning activity is undertaken, suggesting the brain’s in-
tention to learn, and continues for a period after the learn-
ing activity, suggesting that neurogenesis plays a role in the 
consolidation of memory and the benefi cial effects that spaced 
and effortful retrieval practice have on long- term retention.9
Of course, learning and memory are neural pro cesses. The 
fact that retrieval practice, spacing, rehearsal, rule learning, 
and the construction of mental models improve learning and 
memory is evidence of neuroplasticity and is consistent with 
scientists’ understanding of memory consolidation as an agent 
for increasing and strengthening the neural pathways by which 
one is later able to retrieve and apply learning. In the words 

Increase Your Abilities ê 173
of Ann and Richard Barnet, human intellectual development 
is “a lifelong dialogue between inherited tendencies and our 
life history.”10 The nature of that dialogue is the central ques-
tion we explore in the rest of this chapter.
Is IQ Mutable?
IQ is a product of genes and environment. Compare it to 
height: it’s mostly inherited, but over the de cades as nutrition 
has improved, subsequent generations have grown taller. 
Likewise, IQs in every industrialized part of the world have 
shown a sustained rise since the start of standardized sam-
pling in 1932, a phenomenon called the Flynn effect after the 
po liti cal scientist who fi rst brought it to wide attention.11 In 
the United States, the average IQ has risen eigh teen points 
in the last sixty years. For any given age group, an IQ of 100 
is the mean score of those taking the IQ tests, so the increase 
means that having an IQ of 100 today is the intelligence 
equivalent of those with an IQ 60 years ago of 118. It’s the 
mean that has risen, and there are several theories why this is 
so, the principal one being that schools, culture (e.g., tele vi-
sion), and nutrition have changed substantially in ways that 
affect people’s verbal and math abilities as mea sured by the 
subtests that make up the IQ test.
Richard Nisbett, in his book Intelligence and How to Get 
It, discusses the pervasiveness of stimuli in modern society 
that didn’t exist years ago, offering as one simple example a 
puzzle maze McDonald’s included in its Happy Meals a few 
years ago that was more diffi cult than the mazes included in 
an IQ test for gifted children.12 Nisbett also writes about “en-
vironmental multipliers,” suggesting that a tall kid who goes 
out for basketball develops a profi ciency in the sport that a 
shorter kid with the same aptitudes won’t develop, just as a 

Make It Stick ê 174
curious kid who goes for learning gets smarter than the 
equally bright but incurious kid who  doesn’t. The options for 
learning have expanded exponentially. It may be a very small 
ge ne tic difference that makes one kid more curious than an-
other, but the effect is multiplied in an environment where 
curiosity is easily piqued and readily satisfi ed.
Another environmental factor that shapes IQ is socioeco-
nomic status and the increased stimulation and nurturing that 
are more generally available in families who have more re-
sources and education. On average, children from affl uent 
families test higher for IQ than children from impoverished 
families, and children from impoverished families who are 
adopted into affl uent families score higher on IQ tests than 
those who are not, regardless of whether the birth parents  were 
of high or low socioeconomic status.
The ability to raise IQ is fraught with controversy and the 
subject of countless studies refl ecting wide disparities of scien-
tifi c rigor. A comprehensive review published in 2013 of the 
extant research into raising intelligence in young children 
sheds helpful light on the issue, in part because of the strict 
criteria the authors established for determining which studies 
would qualify for consideration. The eligible studies had to 
draw from a general, nonclinical population; have a random-
ized, experimental design; consist of sustained interventions, 
not of one- shot treatments or simply of manipulations during 
the testing experience; and use a widely accepted, standard-
ized mea sure of intelligence. The authors focused on experi-
ments involving children from the prenatal period through age 
fi ve, and the studies meeting their requirements involved over 
37,000 participants.
What did they fi nd? Nutrition affects IQ. Providing dietary 
supplements of fatty acids to pregnant women, breast- feeding 
women, and infants had the effect of increasing IQ by any-

Increase Your Abilities ê 175
where from 3.5 to 6.5 points. Certain fatty acids provide 
building blocks for nerve cell development that the body can-
not produce by itself, and the theory behind the results is that 
these supplements support the creation of new synapses. Stud-
ies of other supplements, such as iron and B complex vitamins, 
strongly suggested benefi ts, but these need validation through 
further research before they can be considered defi nitive.
In the realm of environmental effects, the authors found 
that enrolling poor children in early education raises IQ by 
more than four points, and by more than seven if the inter-
vention is based in a center instead of in the home, where 
stimulation is less consistently sustained. (Early education was 
defi ned as environmental enrichment and structured learning 
prior to enrollment in preschool.) More affl uent children, 
who are presumed to have many of these benefi ts at home, 
might not show similar gains from enrolling in early educa-
tion programs. In addition, no evidence supports the widely 
held notion that the younger children are when fi rst enrolled 
in these programs the better the results. Rather, the evidence 
suggests, as John Bruer argues, that the earliest few years of 
life are not narrow windows for development that soon close.
Gains in IQ  were found in several areas of cognitive train-
ing. When mothers in low- income homes  were given the means 
to provide their children with educational tools, books, and 
puzzles and trained how to help their children learn to speak 
and identify objects in the home, the children showed IQ 
gains. When mothers of three- year- olds in low- income fami-
lies  were trained to talk to their children frequently and at 
length and to draw out the children with many open- ended 
questions, the children’s IQs  rose. Reading to a child age four 
or younger raises the child’s IQ, especially if the child is an 
active participant in the reading, encouraged by the parent to 
elaborate. After age four, reading to the child does not raise 

Make It Stick ê 176
IQ but continues to accelerate the child’s language develop-
ment. Preschool boosts a child’s IQ by more than four points, 
and if the school includes language training, by more than 
seven points. Again, there is no body of evidence supporting 
the conclusion that early education, preschool, or language 
training would show IQ gains in children from better- off fami-
lies, where they already benefi t from the advantages of a richer 
environment.13
Brain Training?
What about “brain training” games?  We’ve seen a new kind 
of business emerge, pitching online games and videos promis-
ing to exercise your brain like a muscle, building your cogni-
tive ability. These products are largely founded on the fi nd-
ings of one Swiss study, reported in 2008, which was very 
limited in scope and has not been replicated.14 The study 
 focused on improving “fl uid intelligence”: the facility for ab-
stract reasoning, grasping unfamiliar relationships, and solv-
ing new kinds of problems. Fluid intelligence is one of two 
kinds of intelligence that make up IQ. The other is crystallized 
intelligence, the store house of knowledge we have accumu-
lated through the years. It’s clear that we can increase our crys-
tallized intelligence through effective learning and memory 
strategies, but what about our fl uid intelligence?
A key determiner of fl uid intelligence is the capacity of a 
person’s working memory— the number of new ideas and re-
lationships that a person can hold in mind while working 
through a problem (especially with some amount of distrac-
tion). The focus of the Swiss study was to give participants 
tasks requiring increasingly diffi cult working memory chal-
lenges, holding two different stimuli in mind for progressively 
longer periods of distraction. One stimulus was a sequence of 

Increase Your Abilities ê 177
numerals. The other was a small square of light that appeared 
in varying locations on a screen. Both the numerals and the 
locations of the square changed every three seconds. The task 
was to decide— while viewing a sequence of changed numer-
als and repositioned squares— for each combination of nu-
meral and square, whether it matched a combination that had 
been presented n items back in the series. The number n in-
creased during the trials, making the challenge to working 
memory progressively more arduous.
All the participants  were tested on fl uid intelligence tasks 
at the outset of the study. Then they  were given these increas-
ingly diffi cult exercises of their working memory over periods 
ranging up to nineteen days. At the end of the training, they 
 were retested for fl uid intelligence. They all performed better 
than they had before the training, and those who had engaged 
in the training for the longest period showed the greatest im-
provement. These results showed for the fi rst time that fl uid 
intelligence can be increased through training.
What’s the criticism?
The participants  were few (only thirty- fi ve) and  were all 
recruited from a similar, highly intelligent population. More-
over, the study focused on only one training task, so it is un-
clear to what extent it might apply to other working- memory 
training tasks, or whether the results are really about working 
memory rather than some peculiarity of the par tic u lar train-
ing. Finally, the durability of the improved per for mance is 
unknown, and the results, as noted, have not been replicated 
by other studies. The ability to replicate empirical results is 
the bedrock of scientifi c theory. The website PsychFileDrawer 
.org keeps a list of the top twenty psychological research stud-
ies that the site’s users would like to see replicated, and the 
Swiss study is the fi rst on the list. A recent attempt whose re-
sults  were published in 2013 failed to fi nd any improvements 

Make It Stick ê 178
to fl uid intelligence as a result of replicating the exercises in 
the Swiss study. Interestingly, participants in the study be-
lieved that their mental capacities had been enhanced, a phe-
nomenon the authors describe as illusory. However, the au-
thors also acknowledge that an increased sense of self- effi cacy 
can lead to greater per sis tence in solving diffi cult problems, 
encouraged by the belief that training has improved one’s 
abilities.15
The brain is not a muscle, so strengthening one skill does 
not automatically strengthen others. Learning and memory 
strategies such as retrieval practice and the building of mental 
models are effective for enhancing intellectual abilities in the 
material or skills practiced, but the benefi ts don’t extend to 
mastery of other material or skills. Studies of the brains of ex-
perts show enhanced myelination of the axons related to the 
area of expertise but not elsewhere in the brain. Observed 
myelination changes in piano virtuosos are specifi c to piano 
virtuosity. But the ability to make practice a habit is general-
izable. To the extent that “brain training” improves one’s ef-
fi cacy and self- confi dence, as the purveyors claim, the benefi ts 
are more likely the fruits of better habits, such as learning how 
to focus attention and persist at practice.
Richard Nisbett writes of environmental “multipliers” that 
can deliver a disproportionate effect from a small ge ne tic 
predisposition— the kid who is ge ne tically just a little bit more 
curious becomes signifi cantly smarter if she’s in an environ-
ment that feeds curiosity. Now stand that notion on its head. 
Since it’s unlikely I’ll be raising my IQ anytime soon, are there 
strategies or behaviors that can serve as cognitive “multipli-
ers” to amp up the per for mance of the intelligence I’ve already 

Increase Your Abilities ê 179
got? Yes.  Here are three: embracing a growth mindset, prac-
ticing like an expert, and constructing memory cues.
Growth Mindset
Let’s return to the old saw “If you think you can, or you 
think you  can’t, you’re right.” If turns out there is more truth 
here than wit. Attitude counts for a lot. The studies of the 
psychologist Carol Dweck have gotten huge attention for 
showing just how big an impact one simple conviction can 
have on learning and per for mance: the belief that your level 
of intellectual ability is not fi xed but rests to a large degree in 
your own hands.16
Dweck and her colleagues have replicated and expanded 
on their results in many studies. In one of the early experi-
ments, she ran a workshop for low- performing seventh grad-
ers at a New York City ju nior high school, teaching them 
about the brain and about effective study techniques. Half the 
group also received a pre sen ta tion on memory, but the other 
half  were given an explanation of how the brain changes as a 
result of effortful learning: that when you try hard and learn 
something new, the brain forms new connections, and these 
new connections, over time, make you smarter. This group was 
told that intellectual development is not the natural unfolding 
of intelligence but results from the new connections that are 
formed through effort and learning. After the workshop, both 
groups of kids fi ltered back into their classwork. Their teach-
ers  were unaware that some had been taught that effortful 
learning changes the brain, but as the school year unfolded, 
those students adopted what Dweck calls a “growth mindset,” 
a belief that their intelligence was largely within their own 
control, and they went on to become much more aggressive 

Make It Stick ê 180
learners and higher achievers than students from the fi rst 
group, who continued to hold the conventional view, what 
Dweck calls a “fi xed mindset,” that their intellectual ability 
was set at birth by the natural talents they  were born with.
Dweck’s research had been triggered by her curiosity over 
why some people become helpless when they encounter chal-
lenges and fail at them, whereas others respond to failure by 
trying new strategies and redoubling their effort. She found 
that a fundamental difference between the two responses lies in 
how a person attributes failure: those who attribute failure to 
their own inability—“I’m not intelligent”— become helpless. 
Those who interpret failure as the result of insuffi cient effort or 
an in effec tive strategy dig deeper and try different approaches.
Dweck came to see that some students aim at per for mance 
goals, while others strive toward learning goals. In the fi rst 
case, you’re working to validate your ability. In the second, 
you’re working to acquire new knowledge or skills. People 
with per for mance goals unconsciously limit their potential. If 
your focus is on validating or showing off your ability, you 
pick challenges you are confi dent you can meet. You want to 
look smart, so you do the same stunt over and over again. But 
if your goal is to increase your ability, you pick ever- increasing 
challenges, and you interpret setbacks as useful information 
that helps you to sharpen your focus, get more creative, and 
work harder. “If you want to demonstrate something over 
and over, ‘ability’ feels like something static that lies inside of 
you, whereas if you want to increase your ability, it feels dy-
namic and malleable,” Dweck says. Learning goals trigger 
entirely different chains of thought and action from per for-
mance goals.17

Increase Your Abilities ê 181
Paradoxically, a focus on per for mance trips up some star 
athletes. Praised for being “naturals,” they believe their per-
for mance is a result of innate gifts. If they’re naturals, the idea 
goes, they shouldn’t have to work hard to excel, and in fact 
many simply avoid practicing, because a need to practice is 
public evidence that their natural gifts are not good enough to 
cut the mustard after all. A focus on per for mance instead of 
on learning and growing causes people to hold back from risk 
taking or exposing their self- image to ridicule by putting 
themselves into situations where they have to break a sweat 
to deliver the critical outcome.
Dweck’s work has extended into the realm of praise and the 
power it has in shaping the way people respond to challenges. 
 Here’s an example. A group of fi fth grade students are indi-
vidually given a puzzle to solve. Some of the students who solve 
the puzzle are praised for being smart; other students who 
solve it are praised for having worked hard. The students are 
then invited to choose another puzzle: either one of similar 
diffi culty or one that’s harder but that they would learn from 
by making the effort to try solving. A majority of the students 
who are praised for their smarts pick the easier puzzle; 90 
percent of the kids praised for effort pick the harder one.
In a twist on this study, students get puzzles from two 
people, Tom and Bill. The puzzles Tom gives the students can 
be solved with effort, but the ones Bill gives them cannot be 
solved. Every student gets puzzles from both Tom and Bill. 
After working to solve the puzzles, some of the kids are praised 
for being smart, and some for their effort. In a second round, 
the kids get more puzzles from both Tom and Bill, and this 
time all the puzzles are solvable.  Here’s the surprise: of the 

Make It Stick ê 182
students who  were praised for being smart, few solved the 
puzzles they got from Bill, even though they  were the same 
puzzles these students had solved earlier when they got them 
from Tom. For those who saw being considered smart as para-
mount, their failure to solve Bill’s puzzles in the fi rst round in-
stilled a sense of defeat and helplessness.
When you praise for intelligence, kids get the message that 
being seen as smart is the name of the game. “Emphasizing 
effort gives a child a rare variable they can control,” Dweck 
says. But “emphasizing natural intelligence takes it out of a 
child’s control, and it provides no good recipe for responding 
to a failure.”18
Paul Tough, in his recent book How Children Succeed, draws 
on Dweck’s work and others’ to make the case that our suc-
cess is less dependent on IQ than on grit, curiosity, and per-
sis tence. The essential ingredient is encountering adversity 
in childhood and learning to overcome it. Tough writes that 
children in the lowest strata of society are so beset by chal-
lenges and starved of resources that they don’t stand a chance 
of experiencing success. But, and  here’s another paradox, kids 
at the top of the heap, who are raised in cosseted settings, 
praised for being smart, bailed out of predicaments by he li-
cop ter parents, and never allowed to fail or overcome adver-
sity on their own initiative, are also denied the character- 
building experiences essential for success later in life.19 A kid 
who’s born on third base and grows up thinking she hit a tri-
ple is unlikely to embrace the challenges that will enable her 
to discover her full potential. A focus on looking smart keeps 
a person from taking risks in life, the small ones that help 
people rise toward their aspirations, as well as the bold, vi-
sionary moves that lead to greatness. Failure, as Carol Dweck 

Increase Your Abilities ê 183
tells us, gives you useful information, and the opportunity to 
discover what you’re capable of doing when you really set 
your mind to it.
The takeaway from Dweck, Tough, and their colleagues 
working in this fi eld is that more than IQ, it’s discipline, grit, 
and a growth mindset that imbue a person with the sense of 
possibility and the creativity and per sis tence needed for higher 
learning and success. “Study skills and learning skills are inert 
until they’re powered by an active ingredient,” Dweck says. 
The active ingredient is the simple but nonetheless profound 
realization that the power to increase your abilities lies largely 
within your own control.
Deliberate Practice
When you see stellar per for mances by an expert in any 
fi eld— a pianist, chess player, golfer— perhaps you marvel at 
what natural talent must underlie their abilities, but expert 
per for mance does not usually rise out of some ge ne tic predis-
position or IQ advantage. It rises from thousands of hours of 
what Anders Ericsson calls sustained deliberate practice. If 
doing something repeatedly might be considered practice, de-
liberate practice is a different animal: it’s goal directed, often 
solitary, and consists of repeated striving to reach beyond 
your current level of per for mance. What ever the fi eld, expert 
per for mance is thought to be garnered through the slow acqui-
sition of a larger number of increasingly complex patterns, pat-
terns that are used to store knowledge about which actions 
to take in a vast vocabulary of different situations. Witness a 
champion chess player. In studying the positions on a board, he 
can contemplate many alternative moves and the countless dif-
ferent directions each might precipitate. The striving, failure, 
problem solving, and renewed attempts that characterize 

Make It Stick ê 184
deliberate practice build the new knowledge, physiological 
adaptations, and complex mental models required to attain 
ever higher levels.
When Michelangelo fi nally completed painting over 400 
life size fi gures on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, he is re-
ported to have written, “If people knew how hard I worked to 
get my mastery, it  wouldn’t seem so wonderful after all.” What 
appeared to his admirers to have fl owed from sheer genius 
had required four torturous years of work and dedication.20
Deliberate practice usually isn’t enjoyable, and for most learn-
ers it requires a coach or trainer who can help identify areas 
of per for mance that need to be improved, help focus atten-
tion on specifi c aspects, and provide feedback to keep percep-
tion and judgment accurate. The effort and per sis tence of 
deliberate practice remodel the brain and physiology to ac-
commodate higher per for mance, but achieving expertise in 
any fi eld is par tic u lar to the fi eld. It does not confer some kind 
of advantage or head start toward gaining expertise in an-
other domain. A simple example of practice remodeling the 
brain is the treatment of focal hand dystonia, a syndrome af-
fecting some guitarists and pianists whose repetitive playing 
has rewired their brains to think that two fi ngers have been 
fused into one. Through a series of challenging exercises, 
they can be helped gradually to retrain their fi ngers to move 
separately.
One reason that experts are sometimes perceived to pos-
sess an uncanny talent is that some can observe a complex 
per for mance in their fi eld and later reconstruct from memory 
every aspect of that per for mance, in granular detail. Mozart 
was famous for being able to reconstruct complex musical 
scores after a single hearing. But this skill, Ericsson says, rises 

Increase Your Abilities ê 185
not out of some sixth sense but from an expert’s superior per-
ception and memory within his domain, which are the result 
of years of acquired skill and knowledge in that domain. 
Most people who achieve expertise in a fi eld are destined to 
remain average performers in the other realms of life.
Ten thousand hours or ten years of practice was the aver-
age time the people Ericsson studied had invested to become 
expert in their fi elds, and the best among them had spent the 
larger percentage of those hours in solitary, deliberate prac-
tice. The central idea  here is that expert per for mance is a 
product of the quantity and the quality of practice, not of ge-
ne tic predisposition, and that becoming expert is not beyond 
the reach of normally gifted people who have the motivation, 
time, and discipline to pursue it.
Memory Cues
Mnemonic devices, as we mentioned, are mental tools to help 
hold material in memory, cued for ready recall. (Mnemosyne, 
one of the nine Muses of Greek mythology, was the goddess 
of memory.) Some examples of simple mnemonic devices are 
acronyms, like “ROY G BIV” for the colors of the rainbow, 
and reverse acronyms, as in “I Value Xylophones Like Cows 
Dig Milk” for the ascending value of Roman numerals from 
1 to 1000 (e.g., V = 5; D = 500).
A memory palace is a more complex type of mnemonic 
device that is useful for or ga niz ing and holding larger vol-
umes of material in memory. It’s based on the method of loci, 
which goes back to the ancient Greeks and involves associat-
ing mental images with a series of physical locations to help 
cue memories. For example, you imagine yourself within a 
space that is very familiar to you, like your home, and then 
you associate prominent features of the space, like your easy 

Make It Stick ê 186
chair, with a visual image of something you want to remember. 
(When you think of your easy chair you may picture a limber 
yogi sitting there, to remind you to renew your yoga lessons.) 
The features of your home can be associated with a countless 
number of visual cues for retrieving memories later, when you 
simply take an imaginary walk through the  house. If it’s impor-
tant to recall the material in a certain order, the cues can be se-
quenced along the route through your  house. (The method of 
loci is also used to associate cues with features you encounter 
along a very familiar journey, like your walk to the corner store.)
As we write this passage, a group of students in Oxford, 
En gland, are constructing memory palaces to prepare for 
their A-level exams in psychology. Every week for six weeks, 
they and their instructor have visited a different café in town, 
where they have relaxed over coffee, familiarized themselves 
with the layout of the place, and discussed how they might 
imagine it occupied with vivid characters who will cue from 
memory important aspects of psychology that they will need 
to write about at exam time.
We’ll come back to these students, but fi rst a few more 
words about this technique, which is surprisingly effective 
and derives from the way imagery serves to contribute vivid-
ness and connective links to memory. Humans remember 
pictures more easily than words. (For example, the image of 
an elephant is easier to recall than the word “elephant.”) So 
it stands to reason that associating vivid mental images with 
verbal or abstract material makes that material easier to re-
trieve from memory. A strong mental image can prove as se-
cure and bountiful as a loaded stringer of fi sh. Tug on it, and 
a  whole day’s catch comes to the surface. When a friend is 
reminding you of a conversation with somebody the two of 
you met on a trip, you struggle to recall it. She tells you where 

Increase Your Abilities ê 187
the discussion happened, and you picture the place. Ah, yes, it 
all comes fl ooding back. Images cue memories.21
Mark Twain wrote about his personal experiences with this 
phenomenon in an article published by Harper’s. In his days 
on the speaking circuit, Twain used a list of partial sentences 
to prompt himself through the different phases of his remarks, 
but he found the system unsatisfactory— when you glance at 
snippets of text, they all look alike. He experimented with al-
ternatives, fi nally hitting on the idea of outlining his speech in 
a series of crude pencil sketches. The sketches did the job. A 
haystack with a snake under it told him where to start his 
story about his adventures in Nevada’s Carson Valley. An um-
brella tilted against a stiff wind took him to the next part of 
his story, the fi erce winds that blew down out of the Sierras at 
about two  o’clock every afternoon. And so on. The power of 
these sketches to evoke memory impressed Twain and gave 
rise one day to an idea for helping his children, who  were still 
struggling to learn the kings and queens of En gland, despite 
long hours invested by their nanny in trying to hammer the 
names and dates into them through brute repetition. It dawned 
on Twain to try visualizing the successive reigns.
We  were at the farm then. From the  house porch the grounds 
sloped gradually down to the lower fence and  rose on the 
right to the high ground where my small work den stood. A 
carriage road wound through the grounds and up the hill. I 
staked it out with the En glish monarchs, beginning with [Wil-
liam] the Conqueror, and you could stand on the porch and 
clearly see every reign and its length, from the Conquest down 
to Victoria, then in the forty- sixth year of her reign— EIGHT 
HUNDRED AND SEVENTEEN YEARS of En glish history 
under your eye at once! . . .  

Make It Stick ê 188
I mea sured off 817 feet of the roadway, a foot representing 
a year, and at the beginning and end of each reign I drove a 
three- foot white- pine stake in the turf by the roadside and 
wrote the name and dates on it.
Twain and the children sketched icons for each of the mon-
archs: a  whale for William the Conqueror, because both names 
begin with W and because “it is the biggest fi sh that swims, and 
William is the most conspicuous fi gure in En glish history”; a 
hen for Henry I, and so forth.
We got a good deal of fun out of the history road; and exer-
cise, too. We trotted the course from the Conqueror to the 
study, the children calling out the names, dates, and length of 
reigns as we passed the stakes. . . .  The children  were encour-
aged to stop locating things as being “over by the arbor,” or “in 
the oak [copse],” or “up at the stone steps,” and say instead 
that the things  were in Stephen, or in the Commonwealth, or 
in George III. They got the habit without trouble. To have the 
long road mapped out with such exactness was a great boon 
for me, for I had the habit of leaving books and other articles 
lying around everywhere, and had not previously been able to 
defi nitely name the place, and so had often been obliged to go 
to fetch them myself, to save time and failure; but now I could 
name the reign I left them in, and send the children.22
Rhyme schemes can also serve as mnemonic tools. The peg 
method is a rhyme scheme for remembering lists. Each num-
ber from 1 to 20 is paired with a rhyming, concrete image: 1 
is bun, 2 is shoe, 3 is tree, 4 is store, 5 is hive, 6 is tricks, 7 is 
heaven, 8 is gate, 9 is twine, 10 is pen. (After 10 you add 
penny- one and start over with three- syllable cue words: 11 is 
penny- one, setting sun; 12 is penny- two, airplane glue; 13 is 

Increase Your Abilities ê 189
penny- three, bumble bee; and so on up to 20.) You use the 
rhyming concrete images as “pegs” on which to “hang” items 
you want to remember, such as the tasks you want to get done 
today. These twenty images stay with you, always at the ready 
whenever you need help to remember a list of things. So when 
you’re running errands: bun gives you the image of a hairstyle 
and reminds you to buy a hat for your ski trip; shoe reminds 
you of being well dressed, prompting you to pick up the dry 
cleaning; tree reminds you of family tree, cuing that birthday 
card for your cousin. The rhyming images stay the same, while 
the associations they evoke change each time you need to hold 
a new list in mind.
A song that you know well can provide a mnemonic 
structure, linking the lyrics in each musical phrase to an im-
age that will cue retrieval of the desired memory. According 
to the anthropologist Jack Weatherford, the preeminent his-
torian of Genghis Khan and the Mongol Empire, traditional 
poems and songs seem to have been used as mnemonic de-
vices for sending messages accurately over vast distances, 
from China at one end of the empire to Eu rope at the other 
end. The military  were forbidden from sending written mes-
sages, and how they communicated remains a secret, but 
Weatherford thinks mnemonic devices  were a likely method. 
He notes that the Mongol song known as the Long Song, for 
example, which describes the movement of a  horse, can be 
sung in varying tones and trills so as to communicate move-
ment through a par tic u lar location, like a crossing of the steppe 
or of the low mountains.
The versatility of mnemonic devices is almost endless. What 
they hold in common is a structure of some kind— number 
scheme, travel route, fl oor plan, song, poem, aphorism, 
acronym— that is deeply familiar and whose elements can be 
easily linked to the target information to be remembered.23

Make It Stick ê 190
To return to the psychology students preparing for their 
A-level exams: In a classroom at Bellerbys College in Oxford, 
a dark- haired eighteen- year- old whom we’ll call Marlys sits 
down to write her A2 exams in psychology. She will be asked 
to write fi ve essays over the course of two testing sessions to-
taling three and a half hours. A-level courses are the British 
equivalent of Advanced Placement courses in the United States 
and are prerequisites for going on to university.
Marlys is under a lot of pressure. For one thing, her exam 
scores will make the difference in whether or not she gets into 
the university of her choice— she has applied to the London 
School of Economics. To be assured a spot in a top university in 
the United Kingdom, students are required to take A-levels 
in three subjects, and the grades they must earn are published 
in advance by the universities. It’s not at all unusual that they 
are required to earn an A grade in each subject. If they earn less 
than the required grade, they must compete in a diffi cult clear-
ing pro cess by which the universities fi ll up their remaining 
spaces, a pro cess that bears a lot in common with a lottery.
If that  weren’t stress-inducing enough, the scope of the 
material for which Marlys must be prepared to show mastery 
in the next hour and a half is enormous. She and her fellow 
psychology students have studied six major topics in their 
second year of A-level preparations: eating behavior, aggres-
sion, relationships, schizo phre nia, anomalistic psychology, 
and the methods of psychological research. Within each of the 
fi rst fi ve topics she must be prepared to write essays on seven 
different questions. Each essay must illuminate the answer in 
twelve short paragraphs that describe, for instance, the thesis 
or condition, the extant research and its signifi cance, the coun-
tervailing opinions, any biological treatments (say, for schizo-
phre nia), and how these relate to the foundational concepts 
of psychology that she mastered for her fi rst- year A-levels. So 

Increase Your Abilities ê 191
she faces: Five major topics, times seven essay questions for 
each topic, with a dozen succinct, well- argued paragraphs in 
each essay to show mastery of the subject. In other words, the 
universe of different essays she must master going into exams 
is a total of thirty- fi ve—plus a series of short answers to ques-
tions on psychological research methods. Marlys knows which 
of the main topics will be the subject of today’s exam, but she 
has no idea which essay questions will be assigned, so she’s 
had to prepare herself to write on all of them.
Many students who reach this point simply freeze. Despite 
being well grounded in their material, the stakes at play can 
make their minds go blank the moment they confront the 
empty exam booklet and the proctor’s ticking clock. That’s 
where having taken the time to construct a memory palace 
proves as good as gold. It’s not important that you understand 
the intricacies of British A-levels, just that they are diffi cult and 
highly consequential, which is why mnemonic devices are such 
a welcome tool at exam time.
Today, the three test topics turn out to be evolutionary ex-
planations of human aggression, the psychological and bio-
logical treatments for schizo phre nia, and the success and 
failure of dieting. Okay. For aggression, Marlys has got the 
she- wolf with her hungry pups at the window of the Krispy 
Kreme shop on Castle Street. For schizo phre nia, she’s got the 
over- caffeinated barista at the Starbucks on High Street. For 
dieting, that would be the extremely large and aggressive pot-
ted plant inside the café Pret- a-Manger on Cornmarket Street.
Excellent. She settles in her seat, sure of her knowledge and 
her ability to call it up. She tackles the dieting essay fi rst. Pret- 
a-Manger is Marlys’s memory palace for the safekeeping of 
what she has learned about the success and failure of dieting. 
Through a prior visit there, she has become thoroughly famil-
iar with its spaces and furnishings and populated them with 

Make It Stick ê 192
characters that are very familiar and vivid in her imagination. 
The names and actions of the characters now serve as cues to 
the dozen key points of her essay.
She enters the shop in her mind. La Fern (the man- eating 
plant in “Little Shop of Horrors,” one of her favorite movies) 
is holding Marlys’s friend Herman captive, her vines wrapped 
tightly around him, restraining him from a large dish of mac 
and cheese that sits just beyond his reach. Marlys opens her 
exam book and begins to write. “Herman and Mack’s restraint 
theory suggests that attempting not to overeat may actually 
increase the probability of overeating. That is, in restrained 
eaters, it is the disinhibition (loss of control) that is the cause 
of overeating. . . .”
In this manner Marlys works her way through the café and 
the essay. Herman breaks free of his restraints with a mighty 
roar and makes a bee line for the plate, practically inhaling 
the pasta to the point of bursting. “Restraint theory received 
support in studies by Wardle and Beale, which found that 
obese women who restrained their eating actually ate more 
[inhaled the pasta] than obese women who took up exercise, 
and more than those who made no changes to their diet or 
lifestyle. However, Ogden argues . . .” and so on. Marlys moves 
mentally through the café clockwise, encountering her cues 
for the boundary model of hunger and satiety, biases arising 
from cultural inclinations to obesity, the problems with diet 
data based on anecdotal evidence, metabolic differences related 
to high levels of lipoprotein lipase levels (“little pink lemons”), 
and the rest.
From Pret- a-Manger she moves on to the Krispy Kreme 
shop, where a mental walk through the interior cues images 
that in turn cue what she’s learned about the evolutionary 
explanations of aggression. Then on to Starbucks, where the 
crazed barista and the shop’s fl oorplan and clientele cue her 

Increase Your Abilities ê 193
through twelve paragraphs on the biological treatments of 
schizo phre nia.
Marlys’s psychology teacher at Bellerbys College is none other 
than James Paterson, the boyish- looking Welshman who just 
happens to be a rising fi gure in world memory competitions.24 
When teachers at Bellerbys fi ll out the paperwork to take 
students on fi eld trips, it’s typically to a lecture at the Saïd 
Business School, or perhaps to the Ashmolean Museum or 
Bodleian Library in Oxford. Not so with James. His paper-
work will more likely seek approval to take students to any of 
half a dozen different cafés around town, comfortable settings 
where they can tap into their imaginations and construct their 
mnemonic schemes. In order for the students to nail all thirty- 
fi ve essays securely in memory, they divide the topics into 
several groupings. For one group they build memory palaces 
in cafés and at familiar locations around the Bellerbys cam-
pus. For another group they use the peg method. Still other 
groups they link to imagery in favorite songs and movies.
We should make one important point, though. Before Pat-
erson takes students on their mnemonic outings to construct 
memory palaces, he has already thoroughly covered the mate-
rial in class so that they understand it.
Among Paterson’s former students who have graduated 
from Bellerbys and gone on to use the technique at university 
is Michela Seong- Hyun Kim, who described for us how she 
prepares for her university- level exams in psychology. First, 
she pulls together all her material from lecture slides, her out-
side reading, and her notes. She reduces this material to key 
ideas— not  whole sentences. These form the plan for her es-
say. Next she selects the site for her memory palace. She ties 
each key idea to a location in the palace that she can visualize 

Make It Stick ê 194
in her mind’s eye. Then she populates each location with 
something crazy that will link her to one of the key ideas. 
When she sits in the exam hall and fi nds out the essay topics, 
she takes ten minutes to mentally walk through the relevant 
memory palaces and list the key ideas for each essay. If she’s 
forgotten a point, she moves on to the next one and fi lls in the 
blank later. Once the plan is sketched out, she sets to work, 
free of the stressful anxiety that she won’t remember what 
she’s learned under the pressure of getting it right.25 What she 
does is not so different from what Mark Twain did when he 
used sketches to remember his speeches.
Michela says that the idea of skipping a bullet point that 
she cannot remember but will fi ll in later would have been 
completely alien to her before learning to use mnemonics, 
but the techniques have given her the confi dence to do this, 
knowing that the content will come to mind momentarily. The 
memory palace serves not as a learning tool but as a method 
to or ga nize what’s already been learned so as to be readily 
retrievable at essay time. This is a key point and helps to over-
come the typical criticism that mnemonics are only useful in 
rote memorization. To the contrary, when used properly, mne-
monics can help or ga nize large bodies of knowledge to permit 
their ready retrieval. Michela’s confi dence that she can pull up 
what she knows when she needs it is a huge stress buster and 
a time saver, James says.
It’s worth acknowledging that Krispy Kreme and Starbuck’s 
shops are not often called palaces, but the mind is capable of 
wondrous things.
At Paterson’s fi rst World Memory Championships, that rookie 
year of 2006, he acquitted himself well by placing twelfth, 
narrowly edging out the American Joshua Foer, who later 

Increase Your Abilities ê 195
published an account of his experiences with mnemonics in 
the book Moonwalking with Einstein. Paterson can memorize 
the sequence of playing cards in a shuffl ed deck in less than 
two minutes, hand you the deck, and then recite them back to 
you with his eyes closed. Give him an hour, and he will mem-
orize ten or twelve decks and recite them back without error. 
Top champs can memorize a single deck in thirty seconds or 
less and upward of twenty- fi ve decks in an hour, so Paterson 
has a ways to go, but he’s a dedicated competitor and coming 
on strong, building his skills and memory tools. For example, 
just as the peg method involves memorizing an image for the 
digits 1 through 10 (1 is bun, 2 is shoe,  etc.), in order to re-
member much longer strings of digits, Paterson has commit-
ted to memory a unique image for every numeral from 0 to 
1,000. This kind of achievement takes long hours of practice 
and intense focus— the kind of solitary striving that Anders 
Ericsson tells us characterizes the acquisition of expertise. The 
thousand images locked into memory took Paterson a year to 
master, fi tted in between the other demands of family, work, 
and friends.
We caught up with Paterson in a school offi ce and asked if 
he’d mind giving us a quick memory demonstration, to which 
he readily agreed. We recited, once, the random number string 
615392611333517. Paterson listened closely and then said, 
“Okay. We’ll use this space.” He looked around at the fi xtures. 
“I see this water cooler  here becoming the space shuttle, which 
is taking off just as an underground train comes shooting out 
the bottom of the cooler. In the bookshelves there behind the 
cooler, I see the rapper Eminem having a gunfi ght with Leslie 
Nielsen from Naked Gun, while Lieutenant Columbo looks 
down on them.”26
How to make sense of this? He remembers digits in groups 
of three. Every three- digit number is a distinct image. For 

Make It Stick ê 196
example, the number 615 is always a space shuttle, 392 is al-
ways the Embankment tube station in London, 611 is Leslie 
Nielsen, 333 is Eminem, and 517 is Lieutenant Columbo. To 
make sense of these images, you need to understand another, 
underlying mnemonic: for each numeral 0 through 9, James 
has associated a sound of speech. The numeral 6 is always a 
Sheh or Jeh sound, the 1 is always a Tuh or Duh sound, and 5 
is an L sound. So the image for the number 615 is Sheh Tuh 
L, or shuttle. Virtually every three- digit number from 000 to 
999 lives in Paterson’s mind as a unique image that is an 
embodiment of these sounds. For our spontaneous quiz, for 
example, he drew on these images in addition to the space 
shuttle:
392 
3 = m, 9 = b, 2 = n 
embankment
611 
6 = sh, 1 = t, 1 = t 
shootout
333 
3 = m, 3 = m, 3 = m 
Eminem
517 
5 = l, 1 = t, 7 = c 
Lt Columbo
In the memory championship event of spoken numbers, 
which are read aloud to contestants at the rate of one per 
second, Paterson can memorize and recite back seventy- four 
without error, and, with much practice, he’s raising that count. 
(“My wife calls herself a memory widow.”) Without mne-
monic tools, the maximum number of digits most people can 
hold in working memory is about seven. That is why local 
telephone numbers  were designed to be no more than seven 
digits long. By the way, at the time of this writing the world 
record in spoken digits—what psychologists call memory 
span—is 364 digits (held by Johannes Mallow of Germany).
James is quick to acknowledge that he was fi rst drawn to 
mnemonics as a shortcut for his studies. “Not the best of mo-

Increase Your Abilities ê 197
tives,” he admits. He taught himself the techniques and became 
a bit of a slacker, walking into exams knowing he had all the 
names, dates, and related facts readily at hand.
What he didn’t have, he discovered, was mastery of the 
concepts, relationships, and underlying principles. He had the 
mountaintops but not the mountain range, valleys, rivers, or 
the fl ora and fauna that compose the fi lled- in picture that con-
stitutes knowledge.
Mnemonic devices are sometimes discounted as tricks of 
memory, not tools that fundamentally add to learning, and in 
a sense this is correct. The value of mnemonics to raise intel-
lectual abilities comes after mastery of new material, as the 
students at Bellerbys are using them: as handy mental pockets 
for fi ling what they’ve learned, and linking the main ideas in 
each pocket to vivid memory cues so that they can readily 
bring them to mind and retrieve the associated concepts and 
details, in depth, at the unexpected moments that the need 
arises.
When Matt Brown, the jet pi lot, describes his hours on 
the fl ight deck of a simulator drilling on the rhythm of the 
different hand movements required by potential emergencies, 
he reenacts distinct patterns he’s memorized for different con-
tingencies, choreographies of eye and hand, where the correct 
and complete sequence of instruments and switches is para-
mount. Each different choreography is a mnemonic for a cor-
rective maneuver.
Karen Kim is a virtuoso violinist. When we spoke with her, 
Kim was second violin in the world- renowned string ensem-
ble Parker Quartet, who play much of their material from 
memory, a rarity in classical music. Second violin is often 
largely accompanimental, and the mnemonic for memorizing 
the harmonies is the main melodic theme. “You sing the mel-
ody in your head,” Kim says, “and you know that when the 

Make It Stick ê 198
melody goes to this place, you change harmony.” 27 The har-
monies of some works, like fugues, with up to four themes 
that pass around the group in intricate ways, are especially 
challenging to memorize. “You need to know that while I’m 
playing the second theme, you’re playing the fi rst. Memoriz-
ing the fugues is very diffi cult. I need to learn everybody  else’s 
part better. Then I start to recognize patterns that I maybe 
knew intellectually before, but I  wasn’t listening out for them. 
Memorizing the harmonies is a big part of knowing the archi-
tecture of the piece, the map of it.” When the quartet is mas-
tering a new piece, they spend a lot of time playing through 
things slowly without the sheet music, and then gradually 
speeding it up. Think Vince Dooley gradually synchronizing 
the different positions on the Georgia Bulldogs football team 
as they tailor their plays to take on a new Saturday night op-
ponent. Or the neurosurgeon Mike Ebersold, examining a 
gunshot victim in the emergency room and methodically re-
hearsing what he’s likely to encounter in a brain surgery that 
he’s about to perform.
Seeing the pattern of physical movements as a kind of cho-
reography, visualizing a complex melody as it is handed off 
like a football from one player to another, “seeing the map of 
it”: all are mnemonic cues to memory and per for mance.
With continued retrieval, complex material can become 
second nature to a person and the mnemonic cues are no lon-
ger needed: you consolidate concepts like Newton’s 3 laws of 
motion into mental models that you use as a kind of short-
hand. Through repeated use, your brain encodes and “chunks” 
sequences of motor and cognitive actions, and your ability to 
recall and apply them becomes as automatic as habit.

Increase Your Abilities ê 199
The Takeaway
It comes down to the simple but no less profound truth that 
effortful learning changes the brain, building new connections 
and capability. This single fact— that our intellectual abilities 
are not fi xed from birth but are, to a considerable degree, 
ours to shape— is a resounding answer to the nagging voice 
that too often asks us “Why bother?” We make the effort be-
cause the effort itself extends the boundaries of our abilities. 
What we do shapes who we become and what  we’re capable 
of doing. The more we do, the more we can do. To embrace 
this principle and reap its benefi ts is to be sustained through 
life by a growth mindset.
And it comes down to the simple fact that the path to 
complex mastery or expert per for mance does not necessarily 
start from exceptional genes, but it most certainly entails 
self- discipline, grit, and per sis tence; with these qualities in 
healthy mea sure, if you want to become an expert, you prob-
ably can. And what ever you are striving to master, whether 
it’s a poem you wrote for a friend’s birthday, the concept of 
classical conditioning in psychology, or the second violin 
part in Hayden’s Fifth Symphony, conscious mnemonic de-
vices can help to or ga nize and cue the learning for ready re-
trieval until sustained, deliberate practice and repeated use 
form the deeper encoding and subconscious mastery that char-
acterize expert per for mance.

200
No matter what you may set your sights 
on doing or becoming, if you want to be a contender, it’s mas-
tering the ability to learn that will get you in the game and 
keep you there.
In the preceding chapters, we resisted the temptation to be-
come overtly prescriptive, feeling that if we laid out the big 
ideas from the empirical research and illustrated them well 
through examples, you could reach your own conclusions 
about how best to apply them. But early readers of those chap-
ters urged us to get specifi c with practical advice. So we do 
that  here.
We start with tips for students, thinking in par tic u lar of 
high school, college, and graduate school students. Then we 
speak to lifelong learners, to teachers, and fi nally to trainers. 
While the fundamental principles are consistent across these 
groups, the settings, life stages, and learning materials differ. 
8
Make It Stick

Make It Stick ê 201
To help you envision how to apply these tips, we tell the sto-
ries of several people who, one way or another, have already 
found their way to these strategies and are using them to great 
effect.
Learning Tips for Students
Remember that the most successful students are those who 
take charge of their own learning and follow a simple but 
disciplined strategy. You may not have been taught how to do 
this, but you can do it, and you will likely surprise yourself 
with the results.
Embrace the fact that signifi cant learning is often, or even 
usually, somewhat diffi cult. You will experience setbacks. These 
are signs of effort, not of failure. Setbacks come with striving, 
and striving builds expertise. Effortful learning changes your 
brain, making new connections, building mental models, in-
creasing your capability. The implication of this is powerful: 
Your intellectual abilities lie to a large degree within your 
own control. Knowing that this is so makes the diffi culties 
worth tackling.
Following are three keystone study strategies. Make a habit 
of them and structure your time so as to pursue them with 
regularity.
Practice Retrieving New Learning from Memory
What does this mean? “Retrieval practice” means self- quizzing. 
Retrieving knowledge and skill from memory should become 
your primary study strategy in place of rereading.
How to use retrieval practice as a study strategy: When you 
read a text or study lecture notes, pause periodically to ask 
yourself questions like these, without looking in the text: What 
are the key ideas? What terms or ideas are new to me? How 

Make It Stick ê 202
would I defi ne them? How do the ideas relate to what I al-
ready know?
Many textbooks have study questions at the ends of the 
chapters, and these are good fodder for self- quizzing. Gener-
ating questions for yourself and writing down the answers is 
also a good way to study.
Set aside a little time every week throughout the semester 
to quiz yourself on the material in a course, both the current 
week’s work and material covered in prior weeks.
When you quiz yourself, check your answers to make sure 
that your judgments of what you know and don’t know are 
accurate.
Use quizzing to identify areas of weak mastery, and focus 
your studying to make them strong.
The harder it is for you to recall new learning from mem-
ory, the greater the benefi t of doing so. Making errors will not 
set you back, so long as you check your answers and correct 
your mistakes.
What your intuition tells you to do: Most studiers focus on 
underlining and highlighting text and lecture notes and slides. 
They dedicate their time to rereading these, becoming fl uent 
in the text and terminology, because this feels like learning.
Why retrieval practice is better: After one or two reviews of 
a text, self- quizzing is far more potent for learning than ad-
ditional rereading. Why might this be so? This is explained 
more fully in Chapter 2, but  here are some of the high points.
The familiarity with a text that is gained from rereading 
creates illusions of knowing, but these are not reliable indica-
tors of mastery of the material. Fluency with a text has two 
strikes against it: it is a misleading indicator of what you have 
learned, and it creates the false impression that you will re-
member the material.
By contrast, quizzing yourself on the main ideas and the 
meanings behind the terms helps you to focus on the central 

Make It Stick ê 203
precepts rather than on peripheral material or on a profes-
sor’s turn of phrase. Quizzing provides a reliable mea sure of 
what you’ve learned and what you  haven’t yet mastered. More-
over, quizzing arrests forgetting. Forgetting is human nature, 
but practice at recalling new learning secures it in memory and 
helps you recall it in the future.
Periodically practicing new knowledge and skills through 
self- quizzing strengthens your learning of it and your ability 
to connect it to prior knowledge.
A habit of regular retrieval practice throughout the dura-
tion of a course puts an end to cramming and all- nighters. 
You will need little studying at exam time. Reviewing the ma-
terial the night before is much easier than learning it.
How it feels: Compared to rereading, self- quizzing can feel 
awkward and frustrating, especially when the new learning is 
hard to recall. It does not feel as productive as rereading your 
class notes and highlighted passages of text feels. But what 
you don’t sense when you’re struggling to retrieve new learn-
ing is the fact that every time you work hard to recall a mem-
ory, you actually strengthen it. If you restudy something after 
failing to recall it, you actually learn it better than if you had 
not tried to recall it. The effort of retrieving knowledge or skills 
strengthens its staying power and your ability to recall it in 
the future.
Space Out Your Retrieval Practice
What does this mean? Spaced practice means studying infor-
mation more than once but leaving considerable time between 
practice sessions.
How to use spaced practice as a study strategy: Establish a 
schedule of self- quizzing that allows time to elapse between 
study sessions. How much time? It depends on the material. If 
you are learning a set of names and faces, you will need to 

Make It Stick ê 204
review them within a few minutes of your fi rst encounter, be-
cause these associations are forgotten quickly. New material 
in a text may need to be revisited within a day or so of your 
fi rst encounter with it. Then, perhaps not again for several 
days or a week. When you are feeling more sure of your mas-
tery of certain material, quiz yourself on it once a month. Over 
the course of a semester, as you quiz yourself on new material, 
also reach back to retrieve prior material and ask yourself 
how that knowledge relates to what you have subsequently 
learned.
If you use fl ashcards, don’t stop quizzing yourself on the 
cards that you answer correctly a couple of times. Continue 
to shuffl e them into the deck until they’re well mastered. Only 
then set them aside— but in a pile that you revisit periodically, 
perhaps monthly. Anything you want to remember must be 
periodically recalled from memory.
Another way of spacing retrieval practice is to interleave the 
study of two or more topics, so that alternating between them 
requires that you continually refresh your mind on each topic 
as you return to it.
What your intuition tells you to do: Intuition persuades us 
to dedicate stretches of time to single- minded, repetitive prac-
tice of something we want to master, the massed “practice- 
practice- practice” regime we have been led to believe is essen-
tial for building mastery of a skill or learning new knowledge. 
These intuitions are compelling and hard to distrust for two 
reasons. First, as we practice a thing over and over we often 
see our per for mance improving, which serves as a powerful 
reinforcement of this strategy. Second, we fail to see that the 
gains made during single- minded repetitive practice come from 
short- term memory and quickly fade. Our failure to perceive 
how quickly the gains fade leaves us with the impression that 
massed practice is productive.

Make It Stick ê 205
Moreover, most students, given their misplaced faith in 
massed practice, put off review until exam time nears, and then 
they bury themselves in the material, going over and over it, 
trying to burn it into memory.
Why spaced practice is better: It’s a common but mistaken 
belief that you can burn something into memory through sheer 
repetition. Lots of practice works, but only if it’s spaced.
If you use self- quizzing as your primary study strategy and 
space out your study sessions so that a little forgetting has 
happened since your last practice, you will have to work harder 
to reconstruct what you already studied. In effect, you’re “re-
loading” it from long- term memory. This effort to reconstruct 
the learning makes the important ideas more salient and mem-
orable and connects them more securely to other knowledge 
and to more recent learning. It’s a powerful learning strategy. 
(How and why it works are discussed more thoroughly in 
Chapter 4.)
How it feels: Massed practice feels more productive than 
spaced practice, but it is not. Spaced practice feels more diffi -
cult, because you have gotten a little rusty and the material is 
harder to recall. It feels like you’re not really getting on top 
of it, whereas in fact, quite the opposite is happening: As you 
reconstruct learning from long- term memory, as awkward as 
it feels, you are strengthening your mastery as well as the 
memory.
Interleave the Study of Different Problem Types
What does this mean? If you’re trying to learn mathematical 
formulas, study more than one type at a time, so that you are 
alternating between different problems that call for different 
solutions. If you are studying biology specimens, Dutch paint-
ers, or the principles of macroeconomics, mix up the examples.

Make It Stick ê 206
How to use interleaved practice as a study strategy: Many 
textbooks are structured in study blocks: They present the so-
lution to a par tic u lar kind of problem, say, computing the vol-
ume of a spheroid, and supply many examples to solve before 
moving to another kind of problem (computing the volume of 
a cone). Blocked practice is not as effective as interleaved prac-
tice, so  here’s what to do.
When you structure your study regimen, once you reach 
the point where you understand a new problem type and its 
solution but your grasp of it is still rudimentary, scatter this 
problem type throughout your practice sequence so that you 
are alternately quizzing yourself on various problem types and 
retrieving the appropriate solutions for each.
If you fi nd yourself falling into single- minded, repetitive 
practice of a par tic u lar topic or skill, change it up: mix in the 
practice of other subjects, other skills, constantly challenging 
your ability to recognize the problem type and select the right 
solution.
Harking back to an example from sports (Chapter 4), a 
baseball player who practices batting by swinging at fi fteen 
fastballs, then at fi fteen curveballs, and then at fi fteen change-
ups will perform better in practice than the player who mixes 
it up. But the player who asks for random pitches during prac-
tice builds his ability to decipher and respond to each pitch as 
it comes his way, and he becomes the better hitter.
What your intuition tells you to do: Most learners focus on 
many examples of one problem or specimen type at a time, 
wanting to master the type and “get it down cold” before mov-
ing on to study another type.
Why interleaved practice is better: Mixing up problem types 
and specimens improves your ability to discriminate between 
types, identify the unifying characteristics within a type, and 
improves your success in a later test or in real- world settings 

Make It Stick ê 207
where you must discern the kind of problem you’re trying to 
solve in order to apply the correct solution. (This is explained 
more fully in Chapter 3.)
How it feels: Blocked practice— that is, mastering all of 
one type of problem before progressing to practice another 
type— feels (and looks) like you’re getting better mastery as 
you go, whereas interrupting the study of one type to practice 
a different type feels disruptive and counterproductive. Even 
when learners achieve superior mastery from interleaved prac-
tice, they persist in feeling that blocked practice serves them 
better. You may also experience this feeling, but you now have 
the advantage of knowing that studies show that this feeling 
is illusory.
Other Effective Study Strategies
ELABORATION improves your mastery of new material and 
multiplies the mental cues available to you for later recall and 
application of it (Chapter 4).
What is it? Elaboration is the pro cess of fi nding additional 
layers of meaning in new material.
For instance: Examples include relating the material to 
what you already know, explaining it to somebody  else in your 
own words, or explaining how it relates to your life outside of 
class.
A powerful form of elaboration is to discover a meta phor 
or visual image for the new material. For example, to better 
grasp the principles of angular momentum in physics, visual-
ize how a fi gure skater’s rotation speeds up as her arms are 
drawn into her body. When you study the principles of heat 
transfer, you may understand conduction better if you imag-
ine warming your hands around a hot cup of cocoa. For ra-
diation, visualize how the sun pools in the den on a wintry 

Make It Stick ê 208
day. For convection, think of the life- saving blast of A/C as 
your uncle squires you slowly through his favorite back- alley 
haunts of Atlanta. When you learned about the structure of 
an atom, your physics teacher may have used the analogy of 
the solar system with the sun as the nucleus and electrons 
spinning around like planets. The more that you can elabo-
rate on how new learning relates to what you already know, 
the stronger your grasp of the new learning will be, and the 
more connections you create to remember it later.
Later in this chapter, we tell how the biology professor 
Mary Pat Wenderoth encourages elaboration among her stu-
dents by assigning them the task of creating large “summary 
sheets.” Students are asked to illustrate on a single sheet the 
various biological systems studied during the week and to 
show graphically and through key words how the systems in-
terrelate with each other. This is a form of elaboration that 
adds layers of meaning and promotes the learning of concepts, 
structures, and interrelationships. Students who lack the good 
fortune to be in Wenderoth’s class could adopt such a strategy 
for themselves.
GENERATION has the effect of making the mind more recep-
tive to new learning.
What is it? Generation is an attempt to answer a question 
or solve a problem before being shown the answer or the 
solution.
For instance: On a small level, the act of fi lling in a missing 
word in a text (that is, generating the word yourself rather 
than having it supplied by the writer) results in better learning 
and memory of the text than simply reading a complete text.
Many people perceive their learning is most effective when 
it is experiential— that is, learning by doing rather than by 
reading a text or hearing a lecture. Experiential learning is a 

Make It Stick ê 209
form of generation: you set out to accomplish a task, you en-
counter a problem, and you consult your creativity and store-
house of knowledge to try to solve it. If necessary you seek 
answers from experts, texts, or the Web. By wading into the 
unknown fi rst and puzzling through it, you are far more likely 
to learn and remember the solution than if somebody fi rst sat 
you down to teach it to you. Bonnie Blodgett, an award- winning 
gardener and writer, provides a strong example of generative 
learning in Chapter 4.
You can practice generation when reading new class ma-
terial by trying to explain beforehand the key ideas you ex-
pect to fi nd in the material and how you expect they will 
relate to your prior knowledge. Then read the material to 
see if you  were correct. As a result of having made the initial 
effort, you will be more astute at gleaning the substance and 
relevance of the reading material, even if it differs from your 
expectation.
If you’re in a science or math course learning different types 
of solutions for different types of problems, try to solve the 
problems before you get to class. The Physics Department at 
Washington University in St. Louis now requires students to 
work problems before class. Some students take umbrage, 
arguing that it’s the professor’s job to teach the solution, but 
the professors understand that when students wrestle with con-
tent beforehand, classroom learning is stronger.
REFLECTION is a combination of retrieval practice and elabo-
ration that adds layers to learning and strengthens skills.
What is it? Refl ection is the act of taking a few minutes to 
review what has been learned in a recent class or experience 
and asking yourself questions. What went well? What could 
have gone better? What other knowledge or experiences does 
it remind you of? What might you need to learn for better 

Make It Stick ê 210
mastery, or what strategies might you use the next time to get 
better results?
For instance: The biology professor Mary Pat Wenderoth 
assigns weekly low- stakes “learning paragraphs” in which stu-
dents are asked to refl ect on what they learned the previous 
week and to characterize how their class learning connects to 
life outside the class. This is a fi ne model for students to adopt 
for themselves and a more fruitful learning strategy than 
spending hours transcribing lecture slides or class notes ver-
batim into a notebook.
CALIBRATION is the act of aligning your judgments of what 
you know and don’t know with objective feedback so as to 
avoid being carried off by the illusions of mastery that catch 
many learners by surprise at test time.
What is it? Everyone is subject to a host of cognitive illu-
sions, some of which are described in Chapter 5. Mistaking 
fl uency with a text for mastery of the underlying content is 
just one example. Calibration is simply the act of using an 
objective instrument to clear away illusions and adjust your 
judgment to better refl ect reality. The aim is to be sure that 
your sense of what you know and can do is accurate.
For instance: Airline pi lots use fl ight instruments to know 
when their perceptual systems are misleading them about criti-
cal factors like whether the airplane is fl ying level. Students use 
quizzes and practice tests to see whether they know as much 
as they think they do. It’s worth being explicit  here about the 
importance of answering the questions in the quizzes that you 
give yourself. Too often we will look at a question on a prac-
tice test and say to ourselves: Yup, I know that, and then move 
down the page without making the effort to write in the an-
swer. If you don’t supply the answer, you may be giving in to 
the illusion of knowing, when in fact you would have diffi -
culty rendering an accurate or complete response. Treat prac-

Make It Stick ê 211
tice tests as tests, check your answers, and focus your studying 
effort on the areas where you are not up to snuff.
MNEMONIC DEVICES help you to retrieve what you have 
learned and to hold arbitrary information in memory 
(Chapter 7).
What are they? “Mnemonic” is from the Greek word for 
memory, and mnemonic devices are like mental fi le cabinets. 
They give you handy ways to store information and fi nd it 
again when you need it.
For instance:  Here is a very simple mnemonic device that 
some schoolchildren are taught for remembering the US Great 
Lakes in geographic order, from east to west: Old Elephants 
Have Musty Skin. Mark Twain used mnemonics to teach his 
children the succession of kings and queens of En gland, stak-
ing the sequence and length of their reigns along the wind-
ing driveway of his estate, walking it with the children, and 
elaborating with images and storytelling. Psychology stu-
dents at Bellerbys College in Oxford use mnemonic devices 
called memory palaces to or ga nize what they have learned and 
must be prepared to expound upon in their A-level essay ex-
ams. Mnemonics are not tools for learning per se but for creat-
ing mental structures that make it easier to retrieve what you 
have learned.
Brief stories follow of two students who have used these strat-
egies to rise to the top of their classes.
Michael Young, Medical Student
Michael Young is a high- achieving fourth- year medical stu-
dent at Georgia Regents University who pulled himself up from 
rock bottom by changing the way he studies.

Make It Stick ê 212
Young entered medical school without the usual founda-
tion of premed coursework. His classmates all had back-
grounds in biochemistry, pharmacology, and the like. Medical 
school is plenty tough under any circumstances, but in Young’s 
case even more so for lack of a footing.
The scope of the challenge that lay before him became 
abruptly evident. Despite his spending every available minute 
studying his coursework, he barely eked out a 65 on his fi rst 
exam. “Quite honestly, I got my butt kicked,” he says. “I was 
blown away by that. I  couldn’t believe how hard it was. It was 
nothing like any kind of schooling I had done before. I mean, 
you come to class, and in a typical day you get about four 
hundred PowerPoint slides, and this is dense information.”1 
Since spending more time studying  wasn’t an option, Young 
had to fi nd a way to make studying more effective.
He started reading empirical studies on learning and be-
came deeply interested in the testing effect. That’s how we fi rst 
learned of him: He emailed us with questions about the appli-
cation of spaced retrieval practice in a medical school setting. 
Looking back on that stressful period, Young says, “I didn’t 
just want to fi nd somebody’s opinion about how to study. 
Everybody has an opinion. I wanted real data, real research 
on the issue.”
You might wonder how he got himself into medical school 
without premed coursework. He had earned a master’s degree 
in psychology and worked in clinical settings, eventually as a 
drug addiction counselor. He teamed up with a lot of doctors, 
and he slowly began to wonder if he would be happier in 
medicine. Had he missed his calling? “I didn’t think of myself 
as being especially intelligent, but I wanted to do more with 
my life and the idea  wouldn’t leave me.” One day he went to 
the biology department of his local university, Columbus State 
in Columbus, Georgia, and asked what courses he would need 
to become a doctor. They laughed. “They said, ‘Well, nobody 

Make It Stick ê 213
from this school becomes a doctor. People at the University of 
Georgia and Georgia Tech go to medical school, we  haven’t 
had anybody go to medical school in a de cade.’ ” Not to be 
put off, Young cobbled together some courses. For example, 
for the biology requirement, the only thing he could take at 
Columbus State was a fi shing class. That was his biology course. 
Within a year he had gotten what ever medical background 
was available from the school, so he crammed for a month for 
the Medical College Admission Test and managed to score just 
well enough. He enrolled at Georgia Regents.
At which point he found himself very far indeed from be-
ing over the hump. As his fi rst exam made all too clear, the 
road ahead went straight up. If he had any hope of climbing 
it, something about his study habits had to change. So what 
did change? He explains it this way:
I was big into reading, but that’s all I knew how to do for 
studying. I would just read the material and I  wouldn’t know 
what  else to do with it. So if I read it and it didn’t stick in 
my memory, then I didn’t know what to do about that. What 
I learned from reading the research [on learning] is that you 
have to do something beyond just passively taking in the 
information.
Of course the big thing is to fi gure out a way to retrieve the 
information from memory, because that’s what you’re going 
to be asked to do on the test. If you  can’t do it while you’re 
studying, then you’re not going to be able to do it on the test.
He became more mindful of that when he studied. “I would 
stop. ‘Okay, what did I just read? What is this about?’ I’d have 
to think about it. ‘Well, I believe it happens this way: The en-
zyme does this, and then it does that.’ And then I’d have to go 
back and check if I was way off base or on the right track.”
The pro cess was not a natural fi t. “It makes you uncom-
fortable at fi rst. If you stop and rehearse what you’re reading 

Make It Stick ê 214
and quiz yourself on it, it just takes a lot longer. If you have a 
test coming up in a week and so much to cover, slowing down 
makes you pretty ner vous.” But the only way he knew of to 
cover more material, his established habit of dedicating long 
hours to rereading,  wasn’t getting the results he needed. As 
hard as it was, he made himself stick to retrieval practice long 
enough at least to see if it worked. “You just have to trust the 
pro cess, and that was really the biggest hurdle for me, was to 
get myself to trust it. And it ended up working out really well 
for me.”
Really well. By the time he started his second year, Young 
had pulled his grades up from the bottom of his class of two 
hundred students to join the high performers, and he has re-
mained there ever since.
Young spoke with us about how he adapted the principles of 
spaced retrieval practice and elaboration to medical school, 
where the challenges arise both from the sheer volume of mate-
rial to be memorized and from the need to learn how complex 
systems work and how they interrelate with other systems. His 
comments are illuminating.
On deciding what’s important: “If it’s lecture material and 
you have four hundred PowerPoint slides, you don’t have time 
to rehearse every little detail. So you have to say, ‘Well this is 
important, and this isn’t.’ Medical school is all about fi guring 
out how to spend your time.”
On making yourself answer the question: “When you go 
back and review, instead of just rereading you need to see if 
you can recall the learning. Do I remember what this stuff 
was about? You always test yourself fi rst. And if you don’t 
remember, then that’s when you go back and look at it and 
try again.”

Make It Stick ê 215
On fi nding the right spacing: “I was aware of the spacing 
effect, and I knew that the longer you wait to practice re-
trieval the better it is for memory, but there’s also a trade- off 
with how successful you are when you try to recall it. When 
you have these long enzyme names, for example, and this step- 
by- step pro cess of what the enzyme is doing, maybe if you 
learn ten steps of what the enzyme is doing, you need to stop 
and think, can I remember what those ten steps are? Once I 
found a good strategy for how much to space practice and I 
started seeing consistent results, it was easy to follow from 
there because then I could just trust the pro cess and be confi -
dent that it was going to work.”
On slowing down to fi nd the meaning: Young has also 
slowed down the speed at which he reads material, thinking 
about meaning and using elaboration to better understand 
it and lodge it in memory. “When I read that dopamine is re-
leased from the ventral tegmental area, it didn’t mean a lot 
to me.” The idea is not to let words just “slide through your 
brain.” To get meaning from the dopamine statement, he dug 
deeper, identifi ed the structure within the brain and examined 
images of it, capturing the idea in his mind’s eye. “Just having 
that kind of visualization of what it looks like and where it is 
[in the anatomy] really helps me to remember it.” He says 
there’s not enough time to learn everything about everything, 
but pausing to make it meaningful helps it stick.
Young’s impressive per for mance has not been lost on his 
professors or his peers. He has been invited to tutor struggling 
students, an honor few are given. He has been teaching them 
these techniques, and they are pulling up their grades.
“What gets me is how interested people are in this. Like, 
in medical school, I’ve talked to all of my friends about 
it, and now they’re really into it. People want to know how 
to learn.”

Make It Stick ê 216
Timothy Fellows, Intro Psych Student
Stephen Madigan, a professor at the University of Southern 
California, was astonished by the per for mance of a student in 
his Psych 100 course. “It’s a tough course,” Madigan says. “I 
use the most diffi cult, advanced textbook, and there’s just a 
nonstop barrage of material. Three- quarters of the way through 
the class, I noticed this student named Timothy Fellows was 
getting 90 to 95 percent of the points on all the class activities— 
exams, papers, short- answer questions, multiple- choice ques-
tions. Those  were just extraordinary grades. Students this 
good— well he’s defi nitely an outlier. And so I just took him 
aside one day and said, ‘Could you tell me about your study 
habits?’ ”2
The year was 2005. Madigan did not know Fellows out-
side class but saw him around campus and at football games 
enough to observe that he had a life beyond his academics. 
“Psychology  wasn’t his major, but it was a subject he cared 
about, and he just brought all his skills to bear.” Madigan still 
has the list of study habit Fellows outlined, and he shares it 
with incoming students to this day.
Among the highlights  were these:
• Always does the reading prior to a lecture
• Anticipates test questions and their answers as he reads
• Answers rhetorical questions in his head during 
lectures to test his retention of the reading
• Reviews study guides, fi nds terms he  can’t recall or 
 doesn’t know, and relearns those terms
• Copies bolded terms and their defi nitions into a reading 
notebook, making sure that he understands them
• Takes the practice test that is provided online by his 
professor; from this he discovers which concepts he 
 doesn’t know and makes a point to learn them

Make It Stick ê 217
• Reorganizes the course information into a study guide 
of his design
• Writes out concepts that are detailed or important, 
posts them above his bed, and tests himself on them 
from time to time
• Spaces out his review and practice over the duration of 
the course
Fellows’s study habits are a good example of doing what works 
and keeping at it, so that practice is spaced and the learning is 
solidly embedded come exam time.
Tips for Lifelong Learners
The learning strategies we have just outlined for students are 
effective for anyone at any age. But they are centered around 
classroom instruction. Lifelong learners are using the same 
principles in a variety of less- structured settings.
In a sense, of course,  we’re all lifelong learners. From the 
moment  we’re born we start learning about the world around 
us through experimentation, trial and error, and random en-
counters with challenges that require us to recall what we did 
the last time we found ourselves in a similar circumstance. In 
other words, the techniques of generation, spaced practice and 
the like that we present in this book are organic (even if coun-
terintuitive), and it’s not surprising that many people have al-
ready discovered their power in the pursuit of interests and ca-
reers that require continuous learning.
Retrieval Practice
Nathaniel Fuller is a professional actor with the Guthrie 
Theater in Minneapolis. We took an interest in him after a 
dinner party where the Guthrie’s renowned artistic director, 
Joe Dowling, on hearing of our work, immediately suggested 

Make It Stick ê 218
we interview Fuller. It seems that Fuller has the capacity to so 
fully learn the lines and movements of a role for which he is 
understudy that he can go onstage at the last moment with 
great success, despite not having had the benefi t of learning 
and rehearsing it in the normal way.
Fuller is a consummate professional of the stage, having 
refi ned his techniques for learning roles over many years. He 
is often cast in a leading role; at other times, he may play sev-
eral lesser characters in a play while also understudying the 
lead. How does he do it?
When he starts with a new script, Fuller puts it into a 
binder, goes through it, and highlights all of his lines. “I fi g-
ure out how much I’ve got to learn. I try to estimate how 
much I can learn in a day, and then I try to start early enough 
to get that learned.”3 Highlighting his lines also makes them 
easy to fi nd and gives him a sense of the construction, so this 
use of highlighting is rather different from what students do 
in class when they highlight merely for purposes of reread-
ing. “You get the shape of the line, and how the back- and- 
forth works.”
Fuller uses retrieval practice in various forms. First, he takes 
a blank sheet of paper and covers a page of the script. He 
draws it down, silently rendering the lines of the characters 
he’s playing opposite, because those lines cue his own, and the 
emotion in them is refl ected one way or another by his own 
character. He keeps his own line covered and attempts to 
speak it aloud from memory. He checks his accuracy. If he 
gets the line wrong, he covers it up and speaks it again. When 
he has spoken it correctly, he reveals the next passage and 
goes on.
“Half of knowing your part is not just what to say, but 
knowing when to say it. I don’t have an exceptional brain for 
memorizing, but one of the keys I’ve found is, I need to try my 

Make It Stick ê 219
best to say the line without looking at it. I need to have that 
struggle in order to make myself remember it.
“I’ll work like crazy. When I get to where it feels like di-
minishing returns, I’ll quit. Then I’ll come back the next day, 
and I won’t remember it. That’s where a lot of my friends will 
panic. I just have faith now that it’s in there, it’s going to come 
back a little bit better the next time. Then I’ll work on a new 
chunk, until I get to the end of the play.”
As he progresses through the script, he’s constantly moving 
from familiar pages and scenes into newer material, the play 
taking shape like threads added to a growing tapestry, each 
scene given meaning by those that came before and extend-
ing the story in turn. When he reaches the end, he practices 
in reverse order, moving from the less familiar last scene to 
practice the more familiar one that precedes it and then con-
tinuing on through the last scene again. Then he goes to the 
part preceding both of those scenes and practices through to 
the end. His practice continues reaching back in this way 
until he has come to the beginning of the play. This working 
backward and forward helps him stitch less familiar mate-
rial to more familiar, deepening his mastery of the role as a 
 whole.
Learning lines is visual ( just as they are laid out in the 
script), but, he says, it’s also “an act of the body, an act of the 
muscles, so I’m trying to say the lines in character, get how it 
feels.” Fuller examines the language of the script, the tex-
tures of the words, and the fi gures of speech for how they 
reveal meaning. He works to discover the way the character 
carries himself, the way he moves across the stage, his facial 
expressions— all facets that reveal the underlying emotions that 
drive each scene. These forms of elaboration help him develop 
an emotional approach to the role and a deeper connection to 
the character.

Make It Stick ê 220
He also notches up his retrieval practice. In place of the 
written script, he now speaks every line of the other actors in 
the play into a palm- sized digital recorder, voiced “in charac-
ter” as best he can discern it. He tucks the recorder in his 
hand. His thumb knows where to fi nd the controls. The thumb 
presses “play,” and Fuller hears the characters’ lines, then his 
cue; the thumb hits “pause,” and he speaks his line from mem-
ory. If in doubt about his accuracy, he checks the script, re-
plays the passage if need be, speaks his lines, and then goes on 
with the scene.
When he’s understudying a role, before the director and 
cast have worked out the blocking (how the players move in 
relation to one another and the set), Fuller practices at home, 
imagining his living room as the stage and the way the block-
ing might be laid out. There, as he goes through scenes with 
his recorder, hearing others’ lines and speaking his own, he is 
moving through the imagined scene, adding physicality to the 
part, reacting to imaginary props. When the actor he’s under-
studying is in rehearsal, Fuller observes from behind the the-
ater seats at the back of the hall, walking through the block-
ing himself as the actors rehearse on stage. He continues to 
practice later at home, adapting the imaginary stage within 
his living room to the now- established blocking.
Fuller’s learning pro cess is a seamless blend of desirable 
diffi culties: retrieval practice, spacing, interleaving, generation 
(of his character’s soul, carriage, motivations, and idiosyncra-
sies), and elaboration. Through these techniques, he learns the 
role and the many levels of meaning that make a per for mance 
come alive to himself and to his audience.
Generation
In 2013, John McPhee published a piece in the New Yorker 
about writer’s block. Age eighty- two at the time, McPhee of-

Make It Stick ê 221
fered his remarks from the vantage of a high perch, atop an 
illustrious career that has earned him many awards and ac-
know ledg ment as a pioneer of the craft of creative nonfi ction. 
Writer’s block is the seemingly insurmountable barrier one must 
somehow clamber over if he is to have any hope of engaging 
his subject. Writing, like any art form, is an iterative pro cess 
of creation and discovery. Many would- be writers fail to fi nd 
their voices for the simple fact that, until they are clear about 
what they want to say, they cannot bring themselves to dive 
in. McPhee’s solution to this problem? He writes a letter to 
his mother. He tells her how miserable he feels, what hopes 
he’d had for the subject about which he wants to write (a 
bear), but that he has no idea how to go about it and, really, it 
seems that he’s not cut out to be a writer after all. He would 
like to put across the sheer size of the bear, and how utterly 
lazy it is, preferring to sleep fi fteen hours a day, and so on. 
“And then you go back and delete the ‘Dear Mother’ and all 
the whimpering and whining, and just keep the bear.”
McPhee’s fi rst draft is an “awful blurting.” “Then you put 
the thing aside. You get in the car and drive home. On the 
way, your mind is still knitting at the words. You think of a 
better way to say something, a good phrase to correct a cer-
tain problem. Without the drafted version— if it did not exist— 
you obviously would not be thinking of ways to improve it. 
In short, you may actually be writing only two or three hours 
a day, but your mind, in one way or another, is working on it 
twenty- four hours a day— yes, while you sleep— but only if 
some sort of draft or earlier version exists. Until it exists, 
writing has not really begun.”4
This is the crux: Learning works the same way as McPhee’s 
“awful blurting.” Your grasp of unfamiliar material often starts 
out feeling clumsy and approximate. But once you engage the 
mind in trying to make sense of something new, the mind be-
gins to “knit” at the problem on its own. You don’t engage the 

Make It Stick ê 222
mind by reading a text over and over again or by passively 
watching PowerPoint slides. You engage it by making the ef-
fort to explain the material yourself, in your own words— 
connecting the facts, making it vivid, relating it to what you 
already know. Learning, like writing, is an act of engagement. 
Struggling with the puzzle stirs your creative juices, sets the 
mind to looking for parallels and meta phors from elsewhere 
in your experience, knowledge that can be transferred and ap-
plied  here. It makes you hungry for the solution. And the so-
lution, when you arrive at it, becomes more deeply embedded 
with your prior knowledge and abilities than anything pasted 
onto the surface of your brain by PowerPoint.
So take a page from McPhee: when you want to master 
something new, delete the whimpering and go wrestle the bear.
Refl ection
In Chapter 2 we tell how the Mayo Clinic neurosurgeon Mike 
Ebersold uses the habit of refl ection to improve his skills in 
the operating room. Refl ection involves retrieval (What did I 
do? How did it work?) and generation (How could I do it bet-
ter next time?), invoking imagery and mental rehearsal as well 
(What if I take a smaller bite with the needle?). It was this habit 
of refl ection that brought him to devise a surgical solution for 
the repair of a delicate sinus structure in the back of the skull 
that cannot be tied off because the structure is somewhat fl at 
and tears when you snug the suture.
Vince Dooley, Georgia Bulldogs football coach (Chapter 3), 
helped his players use refl ection and mental rehearsal to learn 
their playbooks and their adjustments for next Saturday’s 
game. The Minneapolis cop David Garman (Chapter 5) uses 
refl ection to improve his undercover strategies. The power of 
refl ection as a learning technique is apparent throughout the 

Make It Stick ê 223
personal memoir Highest Duty, by Captain Chesley Sullen-
berger. “Sully” is the pi lot who successfully and miraculously 
ditched US Airways Flight 1549 on the Hudson River in 
2009. Time and again, in reading his autobiography, we see 
how he refi ned his understanding of fl ight and the control of 
his aircraft through training, personal experience, and the close 
observation of others. The pro cess started from his earliest 
days at the stick of a single- engine crop duster, continued to his 
jet fi ghter days, his time investigating commercial airline disas-
ters, and his granular analysis of the few available examples of 
the ditching of commercial aircraft, where he paid par tic u lar 
attention to the lessons for pitch, speed, and level wings. The 
evolution of Captain Sullenberger shows us that the habit of 
refl ection is more than simply taking stock of a personal ex-
perience or the observed experiences of others. At its most 
powerful this habit involves engagement of the mind through 
generation, visualization, and mental rehearsal.
Elaboration
When we met the pianist Thelma Hunter, she was learning four 
new works for an upcoming concert per for mance: pieces by 
Mozart, Faure, Rachmaninoff, and William Bolcom. Hunter, 
who is eighty- eight, won her fi rst prize as a pianist at age fi ve in 
New York and has been performing ever since. She is not a 
prodigy, she insists, nor even particularly renowned, but she is 
accomplished. In addition to a busy life raising six kids with 
her husband, Sam, a heart surgeon, Hunter has enjoyed a long 
life of learning, teaching, and performing at the piano, and she 
is still in the game, sought after and bent to her life’s plea sure at 
the keyboard.
Giving new learning multiple layers of meaning has been 
central to Hunter’s methods and illustrates the way elaboration 

Make It Stick ê 224
strengthens learning and memory. When she studies a new 
score, she learns it physically in the fi ngering, aurally in the 
sound, visually in the notes on the score, and intellectually in 
the way she coaches herself through transitions.
Hunter has made some concessions to age. She never used 
to warm up before playing, but now she does. “My stamina 
is not as great as it used to be. My reach is not as big. Now, 
if I memorize something, I have to think about it. I never 
used to have to do that, I just worked through all the aspects 
of it and the memorizing came.”5 She visualizes the score 
and makes mental marginalia. “When I’m practicing, some-
times I say it out loud, ‘Up an octave, at this point,’ but in 
my mind’s eye I visualize the place on the sheet music, as 
well.” In comments that resonate with John McPhee’s obser-
vations about writing, Hunter says that at the point where a 
piece is almost memorized, “I’ll be driving, and I can think 
about the  whole piece, which I do. The shape of it, as though 
I  were a conductor, thinking, ‘Oh, that passage makes more 
sense if I speed it up. I have to practice that to get it faster.’ 
Those are the large things that I can think about away from 
the piano.”
Hunter’s practice regimen is daily, working through new 
pieces, slowing down to parse the diffi cult passages, and then, 
because she now often performs with a cellist and violinist, 
the ensemble works through the pieces together to synchro-
nize their individual interpretations.
In Chapter 7 we describe Anders Ericsson’s research into 
how experts, through thousands of hours of solo, deliberate 
practice, build libraries of mental models that they can deploy 
to address a wide universe of situations they encounter in their 
area of expertise. Hunter describes experiences that would 
seem to manifest Ericsson’s theory. At times she must sit at the 
keyboard and devise a fi ngering plan for playing a diffi cult pas-
sage. Oddly, she says, after having been away from the piece 

Make It Stick ê 225
for a week, she will sit down and play it through, using a fi n-
gering pattern that she had not planned but feels entirely 
natural to her and familiar. It’s a paradox, though perhaps not 
entirely surprising. She credits her subconscious, drawing 
from her long years of playing, with fi nding a more fl uent so-
lution than what she has devised by puzzling it out at the 
keyboard. But perhaps it has been the effort at the keys, like 
McPhee wrestling his bear, that has set her mind to sorting 
through the closets of her memory for something a little more 
elegant and natural to fi t the occasion.
Tips for Teachers
Here again we are leery of being too prescriptive. Every teacher 
must fi nd what’s right in his or her classroom. Yet specifi cs 
can be helpful. So  here are some basic strategies that in our 
judgment will go a long way toward helping students become 
stronger learners in the classroom. Brief descriptions follow 
of what some teachers are already doing along these lines. 
Between the recommendations and the examples, we hope you 
will fi nd practical ideas you can adapt and put to work.
Explain to Students How Learning Works
Students labor under many myths and illusions about learn-
ing that cause them to make some unfortunate choices about 
intellectual risk taking and about when and how to study. It’s 
the proper role of the teacher to explain what empirical stud-
ies have discovered about how people learn, so the student 
can better manage his or her own education.
In par tic u lar, students must be helped to understand such 
fundamental ideas as these:
• Some kinds of diffi culties during learning help to make 
the learning stronger and better remembered.

Make It Stick ê 226
• When learning is easy, it is often superfi cial and soon 
forgotten.
• Not all of our intellectual abilities are hardwired. In 
fact, when learning is effortful, it changes the brain, 
making new connections and increasing intellectual 
ability.
• You learn better when you wrestle with new problems 
before being shown the solution, rather than the other 
way around.
• To achieve excellence in any sphere, you must strive to 
surpass your current level of ability.
• Striving, by its nature, often results in setbacks, and 
setbacks are often what provide the essential informa-
tion needed to adjust strategies to achieve mastery.
These topics, woven throughout the book, are discussed in 
depth in Chapters 4 and 7.
Teach Students How to Study
Students generally are not taught how to study, and when they 
are, they often get the wrong advice. As a result, they gravitate 
to activities that are far from optimal, like rereading, massed 
practice, and cramming.
At the beginning of this chapter we present effective 
study strategies. Students will benefi t from teachers who 
help them understand these strategies and stick with them 
long enough to experience their benefi ts, which may initially 
appear doubtful.
Create Desirable Diffi culties in the Classroom
Where practical, use frequent quizzing to help students con-
solidate learning and interrupt the pro cess of forgetting. Make 

Make It Stick ê 227
the ground rules acceptable to your students and yourself. 
Students fi nd quizzing more acceptable when it is predictable 
and the stakes for any individual quiz are low. Teachers fi nd 
quizzing more acceptable when it is simple, quick, and does 
not lead to negotiating makeup quizzes. (For one example, 
consider the way Kathleen McDermott, whose work we de-
scribe below, uses daily quizzing in her university class on 
human learning and memory.)
Create study tools that incorporate retrieval practice, gen-
eration, and elaboration. These might be exercises that require 
students to wrestle with trying to solve a new kind of problem 
before coming to the class where the solution is taught; prac-
tice tests that students can download and use to review mate-
rial and to calibrate their judgments of what they know and 
don’t know; writing exercises that require students to refl ect 
on past lesson material and relate it to other knowledge or 
other aspects of their lives; exercises that require students to 
generate short statements that summarize the key ideas of re-
cent material covered in a text or lecture.
Make quizzing and practice exercises count toward the 
course grade, even if for very low stakes. Students in classes 
where practice exercises carry consequences for the course 
grade learn better than those in classes where the exercises are 
the same but carry no consequences.
Design quizzing and exercises to reach back to concepts 
and learning covered earlier in the term, so that retrieval 
practice continues and the learning is cumulative, helping 
students to construct more complex mental models, strengthen 
conceptual learning, and develop deeper understanding of 
the relationships between ideas or systems. (For an exam-
ple, read in Chapter 2 how Andy Sobel uses cumulative low- 
stakes quizzing in his university- level course in po liti cal 
economics.)

Make It Stick ê 228
Space, interleave, and vary topics and problems covered in 
class so that students are frequently shifting gears as they have 
to “reload” what they already know about each topic in order 
to fi gure out how the new material relates or differs.
Be Transparent
Help your students understand the ways you have incorpo-
rated desirable diffi culties into your lessons, and why. Be up 
front about some of the frustrations and diffi culties this kind 
of learning entails and explain why it’s worth persisting. Con-
sider having them read the profi le earlier in this chapter of the 
medical student Michael Young, who vividly describes the dif-
fi culties and ultimate benefi ts of using these strategies.
Mary Pat Wenderoth, Biology Professor, 
University of Washington
Mary Pat Wenderoth introduces desirable diffi culties in her 
classes to help students master their coursework. She also 
works at helping students learn how to be effective at manag-
ing their own learning— to be the capable student within the 
professional that they envision becoming. Along that path she 
tackles yet another challenge, helping students learn to judge 
where their grasp of course material stands on Bloom’s tax-
onomy of learning, and how to rise to the levels of synthesis 
and evaluation.
Bloom’s taxonomy classifi es cognitive learning on six lev-
els. It was developed in 1956 by a committee of educators 
chaired by psychologist Benjamin Bloom. The six levels range 
from gaining knowledge (the most fundamental level) to de-
veloping comprehension of the underlying facts and ideas, 
being able to apply learning to solve problems, being able to 
analyze ideas and relationships so as to make inferences, be-

Make It Stick ê 229
ing able to synthesize knowledge and ideas in new ways, and, 
at the most sophisticated level, being able to use learning to 
evaluate opinions and ideas and make judgments based on 
evidence and objective criteria.
Here are some of the main techniques Wenderoth uses.
Transparency.   At the outset, Wenderoth teaches her students 
about the testing effect, the principle of desirable diffi culties, 
and the perils of “illusions of knowing.” She promises to make 
her instructional philosophy transparent and to model these 
principles in class. As she explained to us recently, “The  whole 
idea of the testing effect is that you learn more by testing your-
self than by rereading. Well, it’s very hard to get students to do 
that because they’ve been trained for so long to keep reading 
and reading the book.”6
I  can’t tell you how many times the students come to me and 
they show me their textbook and it’s highlighted in four dif-
ferent colors. I say to them, “I can tell you have done a lot of 
work and that you really want to succeed in this class because 
you have blue and yellow and orange and green highlighter 
on your book.” And then I have to try to tell them that any 
more time spent on this after the fi rst time was a waste. They’re, 
like, “How is that possible?” I say, “What you have to do is, 
you read a little bit and then you have to test yourself,” but they 
don’t quite know how to do that.
So I model it in class for them. Every fi ve minutes or so I 
throw out a question on the material we just talked about, 
and I can see them start to look through their notes. I say, 
“Stop. Do not look at your notes. Just take a minute to think 
about it yourself.” I tell them our brains are like a forest, and 
your memory is in there somewhere. You’re  here, and the mem-
ory is over there. The more times you make a path to that 

Make It Stick ê 230
memory, the better the path is, so that the next time you need the 
memory, it’s going to be easier to fi nd it. But as soon as you get 
your notes out, you have short- circuited the path. You are not 
exploring for the path anymore, someone has told you the way.
At other times, Wenderoth will pose a question to the class 
and ask them to think about it. She has students write three 
possible answers on the whiteboard up front and then vote on 
which answer they think is correct by raising the number of 
fi ngers that corresponds with the answer on the board. She’ll 
instruct students to fi nd somebody with fi ngers “different from 
yours and talk to them and fi gure out who has the correct 
answer.”
Wenderoth gives her students a new way to think about 
learning, and she gives them a new vocabulary for describing 
setbacks. When students trip over an exam question, they’ll 
commonly accuse the test of containing trick questions. When 
the student blames the test, she says, it’s not a good meeting 
ground for solving the problem. But now, students come to 
see her after a disappointing exam and say, “I have the illu-
sion of knowing. How do I get better?” That’s a problem Wen-
deroth can help with.
Testing groups.   Wenderoth has transformed class “study 
groups” into “testing groups.” In a study group, the person 
who knows the most talks and the others listen. The emphasis 
is on memorizing things. However, in a testing group, they all 
wrestle with a question together, without opening the text-
book. “Everybody has bits of information, and you talk with 
your colleagues and fi gure it out.” The emphasis is on explo-
ration and understanding.
Wenderoth will ask students in a testing group what ideas 
they don’t feel really clear on. Then she’ll send one student to 

Make It Stick ê 231
the whiteboard to try to explain the concept. As the student 
struggles, perhaps putting up the pieces of the answer she 
knows, the rest of the group are instructed to test her by ask-
ing questions whose answers will lead her to the larger con-
cept. Throughout, all textbooks remain closed.
Free recall.   Wenderoth assigns her students to spend ten 
minutes at the end of each day sitting with a blank piece of 
paper on which to write everything they can remember from 
class. They must sit for ten minutes. She warns that it will be 
uncomfortable, they will run out of ideas after two minutes, 
but they must stick it out. At the end of ten minutes, they’re 
to go to their class notes and fi nd out what they remembered 
and what they forgot, and to focus on the material they for-
got. What they glean from this exercise guides their notes 
and questions for the next class. Wenderoth fi nds that the 
free recall exercise helps students pull learning forward and 
develop a more complex understanding of how the material 
interrelates.
Summary sheets.   Every Monday, Wenderoth’s students are 
required to turn in a single sheet of certain dimensions on 
which they have illustrated the prior week’s material in 
drawings annotated with key ideas, arrows, and graphs. 
She’s teaching physiology, which is about how things work, 
so the summaries take on the form of large cartoons dense 
with callouts, blowups, directional arrows, and the like. The 
sheets help her students synthesize a week’s information, 
thinking through how systems are connected: “This is caus-
ing this, which causes this, which feeds back on those. We 
use a lot of arrows in physiology. The students can work 
with each other, I don’t care. The sheet they bring in just has 
to be their own.”

Make It Stick ê 232
Learning paragraphs.   From time to time, on a Friday, if she 
 doesn’t feel she’s overburdening them, Wenderoth will assign 
students to write low- stakes “learning paragraphs” for which 
she poses a question and asks students to prepare a fi ve- or 
six- sentence response. A question might be “How is the GI 
tract like the respiratory system?” Or “You just got your tests 
back; what would you do differently next time?” The point is 
to stimulate retrieval and refl ection and to capture a week’s 
learning before it is lost to the countless other concerns and 
diversions of college life. “What I found over the years is, if I 
don’t do anything before the test, they don’t do anything until 
the day before the test.” The learning paragraphs also give her 
science majors practice in writing a passage of clear prose. She 
reads through the responses and makes a point to comment 
on them in class so that students know they’re being read.
Bloom’s taxonomy of learning.   To remove some of the ab-
straction from Bloom’s taxonomy, Wenderoth has translated 
her class material into the different levels of the taxonomy on 
an answer key to her tests. That is, for any given question, she 
provides a different answer for each level of the taxonomy: 
one that refl ects learning at the level of knowledge, a more 
thorough answer that refl ects understanding, a yet more com-
plex answer that refl ects analysis, and so on. When students 
get their tests back, they also receive the answer key and are 
asked to identify where their answers fell on the taxonomy 
and to think about what they need to know in order to re-
spond at a higher level of learning.
Closing the achievement gap in the sciences.   Wenderoth and 
her colleagues have experimented with class structure and the 
principles of active learning to help close the achievement gap 
in the sciences. Poorly prepared students seldom survive entry- 

Make It Stick ê 233
level science courses. As a result, even students whose inter-
ests and aptitudes might lead them to successful science ca-
reers never get through the door. For what ever reason, these 
students do not have a history from high school or family life 
of learning how to succeed in these highly challenging aca-
demic settings.
“For most of us who have found our way in the sciences,” 
Wenderoth says, “any time we fell, there was somebody around 
to help us up, or to say, ‘This is how you get up.’ You  were 
taught that when things don’t go well, you keep working any-
way. You persevere.”
In their experiments, Wenderoth and her colleagues have 
compared the results of “low- structure” classes (traditional 
lecturing and high- stakes midterm and fi nal exams) with “high- 
structure” classes (daily and weekly low- stakes exercises to pro-
vide constant practice in the analytical skills necessary to do 
well on exams). They also teach students the importance of 
having a “growth mindset” (see the work of Carol Dweck, 
discussed in Chapter 7)— that is, that learning is hard work 
and that struggle increases intellectual abilities.
The results? High- structure classes in a gateway biology 
course signifi cantly reduced student failure rates compared to 
low- structure classes— narrowing the gap between poorly pre-
pared students and their better prepared peers while at the 
same time showing exam results at higher levels on Bloom’s 
taxonomy. Moreover, it’s not just whether the student com-
pletes the practice exercises that matters. In the classes where 
exercises count toward the course grade, even at very low 
stakes, students achieve higher success over the course of the 
term compared to students in classes where the exercises are 
the same but carry no consequences for the grade.
“We talk to the students about how these are the habits of 
mind,” Wenderoth says. “This is the discipline that you have to 

Make It Stick ê 234
have in order to succeed in the sciences. They’ve never thought 
about that, that every discipline has a culture. We teach them 
to think like the professionals they want to become. And when 
they fall, we show them how to get up again.”7
Michael D. Matthews, Psychology Professor, 
U.S. Military Academy at West Point
The pedagogical philosophy at West Point is founded on an 
instructional system called the Thayer method, developed al-
most two hundred years ago by an early superintendent of the 
academy named Sylvanus Thayer. The method provides very 
specifi c learning objectives for every course, puts the responsi-
bility for meeting those objectives on the student, and incor-
porates quizzing and recitation in every class meeting.
Students’ grades at the academy rest on three pillars of 
training: academic, military, and physical. Mike Matthews, a 
professor of engineering psychology at the academy, says the 
load on students is enormous, greater than the hours avail-
able to them. In order to survive at the academy, West Point 
cadets must develop an ability to zero in on what’s essential 
and let the rest fall by the wayside. “This is about having very 
high expectations across multiple dimensions and keeping 
them real busy,” Matthews, says. In fact, as stunning as it 
sounds, Matthews will tell a student, “If you’ve read every word 
of this chapter, you’re not being very effi cient.” The point is not 
to “slide your eyes over the words.” You start with questions, 
and you read for answers.8
There’s little or no lecturing in Matthews’s courses. Class 
opens with a quiz on the learning objectives from the assigned 
reading. From there, on many days, students “take to the 
boards.” The classrooms have slate on all four walls, and a 
group of students are sent to each blackboard to collaborate 

Make It Stick ê 235
on answering a question given by the professor. These are 
higher- order questions than are given in the daily quiz, requir-
ing the students to integrate ideas from the reading and apply 
them at a conceptual level. It’s a form of retrieval practice, 
generation, and peer instruction. One student is selected from 
each group to give a recitation to the class explaining how the 
group has answered the question, and then the group’s work 
is critiqued. All class meetings focus on constructs, not spe-
cifi c facts, and on the days the students do not take to the 
boards, they are engaged in other forms of exercise, demon-
stration, or group work aimed at understanding and articulat-
ing the larger concepts underlying the matter at hand.
Clear learning objectives prior to each class, coupled with 
daily quizzing and active problem solving with feedback, keep 
students focused, awake, and working hard.
One of the most important skills taught at West Point is 
something learned outside the classroom: how to shoot an 
azimuth. It’s a skill used for keeping your bearings in unfamil-
iar territory. You climb a tree or a height of land and sight a 
distant landmark in the direction you’re headed. Compass in 
hand, you note how many degrees your landmark lies off of 
due north. Then you descend into the bush and keep working 
your way in that direction. Periodically, you pause to shoot an 
azimuth and make sure you’re on course. Quizzing is a way of 
shooting an azimuth in the classroom: are you gaining the 
mastery you need to get where you’re trying to go?
Matthews has had the privilege of seeing two of his stu-
dents win Rhodes Scholarships. The most recent was Cadet 
Kiley Hunkler (now Second Lieutenant Hunkler). Hunkler will 
be spending the next two years at Oxford University, and then 
matriculating at Johns Hopkins Medical School. It was Hunkler 
who spoke to us of shooting an azimuth. “Everything at the 
academy is about self- responsibility, taking own ership for 

Make It Stick ê 236
fi nding your own way to the objective,” she said.9 The Medical 
College Admission Test, for example, encompasses four major 
course blocks: reading, chemistry, physiology, and writing. For 
each of these blocks, Hunkler created the learning objectives in 
her head that she deemed most important and then set out to 
answer them as she studied. “I took a practice test every three 
days, saw what I got wrong, and adjusted.” Shooting her azi-
muth. “A lot of students get hung up studying for months, try-
ing to memorize everything, but for me it was more about un-
derstanding the concepts. So my azimuth check would be, Okay, 
what is this question asking, what’s the broader theme  here, and 
does that match up with what I’ve outlined for this section.”
One of this book’s authors (Roediger) attended Riverside 
Military Academy in Gainesville, Georgia, for high school. 
Riverside used a form of the Thayer method, with students 
having daily quizzes, problem sets, or assignments to be com-
pleted in class. The range of ability of these younger cadets 
was much more varied than at the elite US Military Academy 
at West Point, but the Thayer method worked well. In fact, 
such methods that include daily participation are especially 
likely to help students who are not prone to work hard on 
their own outside of class. The Thayer method is a strong en-
couragement for them to keep at it, and echoes what Mary 
Pat Wenderoth (above) has found in her empirical studies: 
that high- structure classes help students who lack a history of 
using effective learning techniques and habits to develop them 
and succeed in rigorous settings.
Kathleen McDermott, Psychology Professor, 
Washington University at St. Louis
Kathleen McDermott administers daily low- stakes quizzes in 
a university course on human learning and memory. It’s a class 

Make It Stick ê 237
of twenty- fi ve students that meets twice a week for fourteen 
weeks, minus midterms and a fi nal exam. She gives a four- 
item quiz in the last three to fi ve minutes of every class. The 
questions hit the high points of the lecture, the readings, or 
both. If students have understood the material, they will get 
all four answers right, but they’ll have to think in order to do 
it. Anything covered in the course to date is fair game for a 
quiz, and she will sometimes draw from past material that she 
feels the students  haven’t fully grasped and need to review.
McDermott sets the ground rules very clearly at the start of 
the term. She lays out the research on learning and the testing 
effect and explains why the quizzes are helpful, even if they 
don’t feel helpful. Students are allowed to drop four quizzes 
across the semester. In exchange, absences need not be justi-
fi ed, and no missed quizzes will be made up.
Students initially are not happy about the quiz regime, and 
in the fi rst few weeks of the term McDermott will get email 
from students explaining why they had a legitimate excuse for 
an absence and should be allowed to make up a missed quiz. 
She reiterates the terms: four free absences, no makeups.
McDermott says the quizzes provide an incentive for stu-
dents to attend class and give students a way to contribute to 
their grade on a daily basis if they answer four out of four 
questions correctly. By the end of the semester, her students say 
that the quizzes have helped them keep up with the course and 
discover when they are getting off track and need to bone up.
“The key with quizzes is to establish very clear ground rules 
for the student, and make them manageable for the profes-
sor,” McDermott says. “As a student, you’re either there and 
you take it, or you’re not. For the professor, no hassling over 
makeup tests.”10
The quizzes in totality count for 20 percent of a student’s 
grade in the course. In addition, McDermott gives two 

Make It Stick ê 238
midterm exams and a fi nal. The last two exams are cumula-
tive. Having cumulative exams reinforces learning by requir-
ing students to engage in spaced review.
Columbia, Illinois, Public School District
As recounted in Chapter 2, we have worked with teachers in 
a middle school in Columbia, Illinois, to test the effects of in-
tegrating low- stakes quizzing into the curriculum. Regular 
quizzing and other forms of retrieval practice have been ad-
opted by teachers in the school who  were a part of the re-
search study and by others who  were not but who observed 
the benefi cial results. The initial research project has since been 
extended into history and science classes in the district’s high 
school, where frequent retrieval practice is being used both to 
bolster learning and to help teachers focus instruction on ar-
eas where student understanding and per for mance need to be 
improved.
The Illinois State Board of Education has adopted new math 
and En glish language arts standards for K– 12 education in 
line with the Common Core State Standards Initiative led by 
the National Governors Association and endorsed by the na-
tion’s secretary of education. Common Core establishes stan-
dards for college and career readiness that students should be 
able to meet on graduation from high school. The Columbia 
School District, like others, is redesigning its curriculum and 
its tests to be more rigorous and to engage students in more 
writing and analysis work, with the aim of promoting the 
higher- level skills of conceptual understanding, reasoning, and 
problem solving that will enable students to meet the standards 
established by the state. As one example of this overhaul, the 
sciences curriculum is being vertically aligned so that students 
are reexposed to a subject at various stages of their school 

Make It Stick ê 239
careers. The result is more spaced and interleaved instruction. 
In physical sciences, for instance, middle school students may 
learn to identify the six basic machines (inclined plane, wedge, 
screw, lever, wheel and axle, and pulley) and how they work, 
and then may return to these concepts in subsequent grades, 
delving into the underlying physics and how these basic tools 
can be combined and applied to solve different problems.
Tips for Trainers
Here are some ways trainers are using the same principles as 
those who teach in schools, in a variety of less structured and 
nonclassroom settings.
In- Service Training
Licensed professionals in many fi elds must earn continuing 
education credits to keep their skills current and maintain their 
licenses. As the pediatric neurologist Doug Larsen describes in 
Chapter 3, this kind of training for doctors is typically com-
pressed into a weekend symposium, out of respect for partici-
pants’ busy schedules, set at a hotel or resort, and structured 
around meals and PowerPoint lectures. In other words, the 
strategies of retrieval practice, spacing, and interleaving are 
nowhere to be seen. Participants are lucky to retain much of 
what they learn.
If you see yourself in this scenario, there are a few things 
you might consider doing. One, get a copy of the pre sen ta tion 
materials and use them to quiz yourself on the key ideas, much 
as Nathaniel Fuller quizzes himself on the arc of a play, his 
lines, the many layers of character. Two, schedule follow- up 
emails to appear in your inbox every month or so with ques-
tions that require you to retrieve the critical learning you gained 
from the seminar. Three, contact your professional association 

Make It Stick ê 240
and ask them to consider revamping their approach to train-
ing along the lines outlined in this book.
The testing effect forms the basis of a new commercial 
training platform called Qstream that helps trainers send 
learners periodic quizzes via their mobile devices to strengthen 
learning through spaced retrieval practice. Similarly, an emerg-
ing platform called Osmosis uses mobile and Web based soft-
ware to provide learners access to thousands of crowdsourced 
practice questions and explanations. Osmosis combines the 
testing effect, spacing, and social networking to facilitate what 
its developers call “student- driven social learning.” Qstream 
(qstream.com) and Osmosis (osmose- it.com) suggest inter-
esting possibilities for redesigning in- service training for 
professionals. Many other companies are developing similar 
programs.
Kathy Maixner, Business Coach
The Maixner Group is a consulting shop based in Portland, 
Oregon, that helps companies identify growth strategies and 
improve their sales tactics. Kathy Maixner fries big fi sh and 
little. One of the big fi sh added $21 million to its annual rev-
enue as a result of hooking up with Maixner. One of the small 
ones, Inner Gate Acu punc ture (profi led at the close of this 
chapter), learned how to establish a solid business management 
footing under a clinical practice whose growth was outpacing 
its control systems.
 We’re interested in Maixner because the coaching tech-
niques she has developed over her career line up so well with 
the learning principles described in this book. In short, Maixner 
sees her role as helping the client dig past the symptoms of a 
problem to discover its root causes, and then to generate pos-
sible solutions and play out the implications of different strat-
egies before committing to them.

Make It Stick ê 241
Maixner told us: “If you hand people the solution, they 
don’t need to explore how you got to that solution. If they 
generate the solution, then they’re the ones who are traveling 
down that road. Should they go left or right? We discuss the 
options.”11
Maixner’s years of experience working with clients in 
many different fi elds helps her see around corners, where the 
hazards lie. She often uses role- playing to simulate prob-
lems, getting her clients to generate solutions, try them out, 
get feedback, and practice what works. In other words, she 
introduces the diffi culties that make the learning stronger and 
more accurately refl ect what the client will encounter out in 
the marketplace.
Farmers Insurance
Corporate sales training can be complicated. Typically, it’s 
about corporate culture, beliefs and behavior, and learning to 
promote and protect the brand. It’s also technical, learning the 
features and advantages of the products. And it’s partly strate-
gic, learning about the target market and how to generate pros-
pects and make sales. At Farmers Insurance, whose principal 
sales force is a cadre of about fourteen thousand exclusive in-
de pen dent agents, training must also equip the company’s reps 
to become successful as entrepreneurs, building and managing 
their own agency.
Farmers sells property and casualty policies and investment 
products like annuities and mutual funds to the tune of about 
$20 billion a year. Describing the full scope of their training 
could fi ll volumes, but we’ll focus on the way Farmers brings 
new agents on board, training them in the four areas of sales, 
marketing systems, business planning, and advocacy of the 
brand. The company’s new-agent training is an excellent ex-
ample of interleaving the learning and practice of different 

Make It Stick ê 242
but related topics so that each adds meaning to the other, 
broadening and deepening competency.
The company recruits upward of two thousand new agents 
annually. Many leave traditional jobs elsewhere, drawn to the 
rewards of running their own business and the opportunity 
to represent an established product line. Newly appointed 
agents arrive at one of two training campuses for an intensive 
weeklong program of learning exercises that spiral upward in 
sophistication.
At the start, participants are given a pile of magazines, scis-
sors, and marking pens with which to illustrate on poster-
board what being a successful Farmers agent would look like 
to them personally, fi ve years down the road. For some, the 
poster shows fancy  houses and cars. For others, kids are being 
sent to college and aging parents are being cared for. The point 
is simple: if your defi nition of success requires, say, $250,000 
a year in revenues and twenty- fi ve hundred policies in force, 
we can help you work backward to set the metrics for where 
you need to be in four years, in three years, and even three 
months from now. The image on the poster shows where you’re 
headed, the metrics are your road map, and the skills that are 
learned over the coming days and months are the tools that 
will enable you to make the journey.
From  here, the week is not so much about teaching from 
the top down— there are no PowerPoint lectures as such— but 
about learning from the bottom up, as in: “What knowledge 
and skills do I need in order to succeed?”
The learning unfolds through a series of exercises that cy-
cle through the principal topics of sales, marketing systems, 
business planning, and advocacy of the company’s values and 
its brands— returning time and again to each, requiring that 
participants recall what they have learned earlier and apply it 
in a new, enlarged context.

Make It Stick ê 243
For example, when participants fi rst arrive, they’re assigned 
to a red, blue, or green group. The red group is instructed to 
go meet people in the room. The blue group is instructed to 
go learn three things about somebody in the room. The green 
group is instructed to ask another member of the class about 
his or her family, prior occupation, favorite forms of recre-
ation, and what he or she enjoys most. When the class recon-
venes, they share what they have learned about others, and it 
is quickly evident that the green group, which had a structure 
for talking to others, learned much more than did their peers.
When talking about sales later in the week the question 
comes up, what’s an effective way to learn about a prospec-
tive customer? Somebody will recall the initial get- acquainted 
exercise that proved so fruitful: asking about one’s family, 
occupation, recreation, and enjoyment. That icebreaker now 
morphs into a handy tool for getting to know a prospective 
client and it gets an acronym: FORE.
Throughout the week the four principal training topics are 
repeatedly touched on, a point is made, and the exercises shift 
to related questions. In one session, participants brainstorm 
what kinds of marketing and development strategies might 
generate the fl ow of leads they need in order to meet sales tar-
gets. An effective sales and marketing system has a structure 
called 5- 4- 3- 2- 1. Five new business marketing initiatives ev-
ery month, four cross- marketing and four retention programs 
in place, three appointments scheduled every day, two ap-
pointments kept (prospects often have to reschedule), one new 
customer sold on average two policies per sale. At twenty- two 
working days a month, that’s about fi ve hundred new policies 
in a year, making twenty- fi ve hundred over the fi ve- year hori-
zon of the agent’s vision.
Practice is a central learning strategy. For example, they 
practice how to respond to a sales lead. Trying to sell the 

Make It Stick ê 244
company’s products is how they learn about selling, but it’s 
also how they learn about the products they’re selling— not 
by sitting in front of PowerPoint slides gazing at long lists of 
product features. You be the agent, I’ll be the customer. Then 
we’ll switch.
Interwoven with these exercises are others that help the 
new agents learn about the company’s history, what it stands 
for, and the value of its products in people’s lives, for instance 
through stories of how it has helped people recover from ca-
tastrophes like Hurricane Katrina.
Given the emphasis on marketing and the limited resources 
new agents have to invest, how does an agent determine which 
strategies will pay? The question goes out: What’s a reasonable 
return to expect from a direct mail campaign? The agents mull 
it over and hazard guesses. Usually, one or more of the agents 
will have had direct- mail marketing experience and offer the 
sobering answer: returns are closer to 1 percent than the 50 
percent many had guessed.
Once you turn up a lead, how do you discover needs he or 
she has that the company’s products can meet? They return to 
the handy acronym FORE. Now, the habit of asking about 
one’s family, occupation, recreation, and enjoyment becomes 
something even more potent than a tool for getting acquainted. 
It provides an opening into four of the most important realms 
of a prospect’s life where insurance and fi nancial products can 
help that person protect his or her assets and achieve his or 
her fi nancial goals. At each pivot from one subject back to 
another, understanding deepens, and new skills take form.
In this way, through generation, spaced practice, and inter-
leaving of the essential core curriculum, with an eye always to 
the fi ve- year vision and road map, new agents learn what they 
need to do, and how, in order to thrive as a part of the Farm-
ers Insurance family.

Make It Stick ê 245
Jiffy Lube
If you don’t expect innovations in training to spring from your 
local ser vice garage, Jiffy Lube may surprise you. An integrated 
suite of educational courses under the felicitous name Jiffy 
Lube University is helping the company’s franchisees win cus-
tomers, reduce employee turnover, broaden their ser vice offer-
ings, and boost sales.
Jiffy Lube is a network of more than two thousand ser-
vice centers in the United States and Canada that provide oil 
changes, tire rotation, and other automotive ser vices. Although 
the company is a subsidiary of Shell Oil Company, every out-
let is owned and operated by an in de pen dent franchisee, who 
hires employees to serve customers.
The rapid- oil- change business, like most others, has had to 
adjust to changes in the marketplace and advances in technol-
ogy. Synthetic lubricants have made oil changes less frequent, 
and because cars have become more complicated, garage 
employees need higher levels of training to understand diag-
nostic codes and provide appropriate ser vices.
No employee may work on a customer’s car until he or she 
has been certifi ed as profi cient. For this, they enter Jiffy Lube 
University, a Web- based learning platform. Certifi cation starts 
with interactive e-learning, with frequent quizzing and feed-
back to learn what a par tic u lar job entails and how it’s to be 
performed. When employees score 80 percent or better on an 
exam, they are eligible to begin training on the job, practicing 
new skills by following a written guide that breaks each ser-
vice activity into its component steps. The steps may number 
as many as thirty and are performed as a part of a team, often 
involving call and response (for example, between a techni-
cian working from the top side of an engine and another un-
derneath). A supervisor coaches the employee and rates his or 

Make It Stick ê 246
her per for mance on each step. When the technician demon-
strates mastery, certifi cation is recorded in his or her perma-
nent fi le, signed by the supervisor. Technicians must recertify 
every two years to keep their mastery up to snuff and adapt to 
operational and technical changes. Higher- level jobs for ad-
vanced ser vices like brake repair or running engine diagnos-
tics are trained in the same manner.
The e-learning and on- the- job training are active learning 
strategies that incorporate various forms of quizzing, feed-
back, and spaced and interleaved practice. All progress is dis-
played by computer on a virtual “dashboard” that provides 
an individualized learning plan, enabling an employee to track 
his or her per for mance, focus on skills that need to be raised, 
and monitor his or her progress against the company’s com-
pletion schedule. Jiffy Lube employees are typically eigh teen 
to twenty- fi ve years old and fi lling their fi rst job. As a techni-
cian is certifi ed in one job, he or she begins training in an-
other, until he or she has trained in all store positions, includ-
ing management.
Ken Barber, Jiffy Lube International’s manager of learning 
and development, says training has to be engaging in order to 
hold employees’ attention. At the time we spoke, Barber was 
putting the fi nishing touches on a computer- based simulation 
game for company managers called “A Day in the Life of a 
Store Manager.” The ser vice center manager is confronted with 
various challenges and is required to select among a range of 
possible strategies for resolving them. The manager’s choices 
determine how the game unfolds, providing feedback and the 
opportunity to strive for better outcomes, sharpening decision- 
making skill.
In the six years since Jiffy Lube University was launched, it 
has received many accolades from the training profession and 
earned accreditation by the American Council on Education. 

Make It Stick ê 247
Employees who progress through training in all job certifi ca-
tions can enroll at a postsecondary institution with seven 
hours of college credit under their belts. Since the program’s 
beginning, employee turnover has dropped and customer sat-
isfaction has increased.
“For most employees of a Jiffy Lube franchisee, this is a 
way into the workforce, and the training curriculum helps 
them to continue to grow and expand their knowledge,” Bar-
ber says. “It helps them fi nd a path to success.”12
Andersen Windows and Doors
At Andersen Windows and Doors, a culture of continuous 
improvement turns learning on its head: the production work-
ers teach the managers how to make the plant more effi cient.
This story is a little different from the others in this chapter 
in two respects. It’s partly about creating a learning culture in 
the workplace, and partly about empowering employees to 
use what they learn to change the workplace. By encouraging 
employees to identify problems on the job and propose im-
provements, the company is supporting one of the most pow-
erful learning techniques we have discussed, wrestling to solve 
a problem.
A good place to focus is on the company’s division called 
Renewal by Andersen, which produces replacement windows 
of all types and sizes: double- hung, casement, gliding, picture 
windows, and specialty windows in nontraditional shapes.
At Renewal by Andersen’s facility in Cottage Grove, Min-
nesota, their double- hung production line employs thirty- six 
people during an eight- hour shift that is divided into three 
work cells, one for sash fabrication, another for frame fabrica-
tion, and one for fi nal assembly. Each work cell has four work 
stations and is led by a crew leader who is responsible for 

Make It Stick ê 248
safety, quality, cost, and delivery within that cell. Workers 
change jobs every two hours to minimize repetitive stress in-
juries and broaden cross- training. Like interleaving the practice 
of two or more different but related topics, frequent switch-
ing between jobs builds an understanding of the integrated 
pro cess for which their unit is responsible and equips workers 
to respond more broadly to unexpected events that arise.
It probably won’t surprise you to learn that every job is 
performed to a written standard that describes each step and 
the way it is to be taken. The written standard is essential for 
uniformity of product and quality. Without it, plant manager 
Rick Wynveen says, four different people will perform the job 
in four different ways, and produce four different versions of 
the product.
When a new employee comes on board, he or she is trained 
following an instructional sequence of practice and feedback 
that Wynveen calls “tell— show—do—review.” The new worker 
is paired with an experienced worker, practice is on- the- job, 
and feedback brings learning and per for mance in line with the 
written standard.
How do the workers train the managers? When a worker 
has an idea for improving productivity and management en-
dorses it, for instance revamping the way parts arrive at a 
work station to make life easier for the worker and assembly 
faster, the worker who offered it takes leave from production 
to help implement the new standard. “Everyone’s idea is valu-
able,” Wynveen told us, “whether you’re an engineer, a main-
tenance technician, or a production worker.”13 Likewise, when 
one of the production line teams comes up short in meeting its 
targets, it’s the workers who are asked to identify the problem 
and redesign the production pro cess to solve it.
The instructional role of employees is most dramatically 
illustrated in what Wynveen calls a Kaizen event. Kaizen is a 

Make It Stick ê 249
Japa nese term for improvement. It has been central to Toy-
ota Motor Company’s success and has been adopted by 
many other companies to help create a culture of continuous 
improvement.
When Wynveen wanted to effect a major increase in the 
productivity of the plant’s double- hung window line, he re-
cruited a design team to engage in a Kaizen event. The team 
consisted of an engineer, a maintenance technician, a crew 
leader from the production line, and fi ve production work-
ers. They  were given the stretch goals of reducing the line’s 
space requirement by 40 percent and doubling production. 
(Stretch goals are ones that cannot be reached through incre-
mental improvement but require signifi cant restructuring of 
methods.) The team met in a conference room eight hours a 
day for a week, in effect teaching each other the elements, ca-
pacities, and constraints of the production pro cess and asking 
themselves how to make it smaller and better. The following 
week they came back to Wynveen saying “Here’s what we 
think we can do.”
Wynveen took their plan to each of the twelve work stations 
on the line with a simple question: What changes are needed to 
make this plan work? Production workers and their crew lead-
ers put their heads together and redesigned the components to 
fi t the new plan. The line was disassembled and rebuilt in two 
halves, over two weekends, restarted, and fi ne- tuned over sub-
sequent months, a pro cess that generated yet an additional two 
hundred improvements suggested by production workers: a 
learning pro cess of testing, feedback, and correction.
The result? After fi ve months, the plant had met Wynveen’s 
stretch goals and cut costs in half. During the conversion and 
shakedown, the production teams never missed a shipment 
and never had a quality issue. The principle of engagement—
actively seeking the ideas of employees from all levels of the 

Make It Stick ê 250
plant—is central to the company’s culture of continuous im-
provement. “Engagement is a management style of trust and a 
willingness to talk,” Wynveen says. The production employees 
learned how to refi ne the design as they worked, and the 
company provided a way for suggestions to be heard and for 
employees to participate in their implementation.
A learning culture places the responsibility for learning 
with the employees and empowers them to change the system. 
Problems become information rather than failures. And learn-
ing by solving the problems (generation) and by teaching oth-
ers (elaboration) becomes an engine for continuous improve-
ment of per for mance by individuals and by the production 
line that they compose.
Inner Gate Acu punc ture
There are times when getting learning and teaching right can 
shape the trajectory of an entire life. Consider Erik Isaacman, 
a thirty- something husband, father of two, and passionate 
practitioner of traditional Chinese medicine: acu punc ture, 
massage, and herbal therapy. We close this chapter with the 
story of a turning point in Erik’s fl edgling practice, Inner Gate 
Acu punc ture in Portland, Oregon. It’s the story of a clinic that 
was succeeding in its therapeutic mission but struggling as a 
business.
Erik and his business partner, Oliver Leonetti, opened In-
ner Gate in 2005, after earning graduate degrees in tradi-
tional Chinese medicine. Through networking and creative 
marketing, they began to build a stream of clients. Portland is 
fertile territory for alternative therapies. The business grew, 
and so did expenses: They leased larger space, hired an assis-
tant to schedule appointments and manage the offi ce, brought 
in a third clinician, and hired a back- offi ce employee. “We  were 

Make It Stick ê 251
growing 35 to 50 percent every year,” Erik recalled when we 
spoke. “The growth covered up a lot that was missing: We 
didn’t have the systems in place to manage costs. We didn’t 
have clear goals or a management hierarchy. It was fast be-
coming clear that we had no idea how to run a business.”14
One of Erik’s patients is the Oregon business coach Kathy 
Maixner. Maixner offered to help. “Unmanaged growth is 
scary,” she told us. “You jump ahead, then you fl ounder.” She 
asked a lot of questions that quickly focused Erik’s and Oli-
ver’s thinking on critical gaps in their systems. The three then 
set out a schedule of frequent coaching sessions, between which 
Erik and Oliver generated elements of the missing infrastruc-
ture: operating manual, job descriptions, fi nancial goals, met-
rics for mea sur ing the per for mance of their clinicians.
Every business serves two masters, its customer and its bot-
tom line. “Our clinicians need to understand more than how 
to practice traditional Chinese medicine,” Erik said, as he re-
fl ected on his and Oliver’s learning curve. “They need to un-
derstand how to turn a patient visit into a relationship, and 
how to help the patient understand his insurance coverage. 
Satisfying our customers is our highest priority. But we have 
to pay the bills, too.”
Maixner used generation, refl ection, elaboration, and re-
hearsal in her coaching sessions, asking questions that exposed 
gaps in thinking or that invited the partners to strengthen 
their understanding of the behavior and tools they needed to 
adopt in order to be effective managers who delegate and 
empower their employees.
They developed a system to track clinic metrics, like the 
number of patient visits, patient disappearance rates, and re-
ferral sources. They learned how to ensure they  were paid ap-
propriately by insurance companies, raising reimbursements 
from as little as 30 cents on the dollar. They drafted a uniform 

Make It Stick ê 252
protocol, or template, for clinicians to follow in seeing a new 
patient. They role- played conversations between themselves 
and their employees.
Central to putting the clinic on sound footing has been Erik’s 
becoming an effective coach and teacher of his coworkers. 
“We’re not just letting it be intuitive,” he said. For example, 
the new protocol for clinicians to follow in a patient’s initial 
session helps to clarify what brought the patient in, the thera-
pies that might be useful, how to describe these therapies in 
terms the patient would be likely to understand, how to discuss 
fees and insurance reimbursement options, and how to rec-
ommend a treatment plan.
“If you’re the clinician, we’ll role- play: You are now the pa-
tient, and I’m the clinician. We raise questions, objections, and 
we practice how to respond and end up at the right place for 
the patient and for the clinic. Then we’ll switch roles. We re-
cord the role playing, and we listen to the differences: how you 
have responded to the patient, and how I have responded.”
In other words, learning through simulation, generation, 
testing, feedback, and practice.
As we write this, Inner Gate is in its eighth year, supporting 
four clinicians and two and a half administrative staff. A fi fth 
clinician is coming up to speed, and the partners are looking 
to open a second location. By dedicating themselves to being 
learners as well as teachers, Erik and Oliver have turned their 
passion into a solid enterprise, and a top- rated acu punc ture 
clinic in Portland.
We have talked throughout this book about learning, not about 
education. The responsibility for learning rests with every indi-
vidual, whereas the responsibility for education (and training, 
too) rests with the institutions of society. Education embraces 

Make It Stick ê 253
a world of diffi cult questions. Are we teaching the right things? 
Do we reach children young enough? How should we mea sure 
outcomes? Are our young people mortgaging their futures to 
pay for a college degree?
These are urgent issues, and we need to wrestle through 
them. But while  we’re doing that, the techniques for highly 
effective learning that are outlined in this book can be put 
to use right now everywhere learners, teachers, and trainers 
are at work. They come at no cost, they require no struc-
tural reform, and the benefi ts they promise are both real and 
long- lasting.


NO TES
SUGGESTED READING
AC KNOW LEDG MENTS
INDEX


257
 1. Learning Is Misunderstood
 1. The term mental model was fi rst coined to refer to complex 
conceptual repre sen ta tions, such as understanding the workings 
of an electrical grid or an automobile engine. We extend the 
use  here to motor skills, referring to what are sometimes called 
motor schemas.
 2. The data about student study strategies come from a survey 
by J. D. Karpicke, A. C. Butler, & H. L. Roediger, Metacogni-
tive strategies in student learning: Do students practice re-
trieval when they study on their own?, Memory 17 (2010), 
471– 479.
 3. Peter Brown interview of Matt Brown, March 28, 2011, Hast-
ings, MN. All quotes of Matt Brown are from this interview.
 4. Find this advice online at  http:// caps .gmu .edu /educational 
programs /pamphlets /StudyStrategies .pdf, accessed November 
1, 2013.
 5. Find this advice online at  www .dartmouth .edu /~acskills /docs 
/study _actively .doc, accessed November 1, 2013.
Notes

Notes to Pages 12–20 
ê 258
 6. The study advice cited from the St. Louis Post- Dispatch is dis-
tributed by Newspapers in Education and can be seen online 
in “Testing 1, 2, 3! How to Study and Take Tests,” p14, at 
 http:// nieonline .com /includes /hottopics /Testing %20Testing 
%20123 .pdf, accessed November 2, 2013.
 7. The studies showing the futility of mere repetition in recalling 
the details of what a penny looks like or where a fi re extin-
guisher is located in a building are in R. S. Nickerson & M. J. 
Adams, Long term memory of a common object, Cognitive 
Psychology 11 (1979), 287– 307, and A. D. Castel, M. Vendetti, & 
K. J. Holyoak, Inattentional blindness and the location of fi re 
extinguishers, Attention, Perception and Per for mance 74 (2012), 
1391– 1396.
 8. The experiment referred to by Tulving was reported in E. Tulv-
ing, Subjective or ga ni za tion and the effects of repetition in 
multi- trial free recall learning, Journal of Verbal Learning and 
Verbal Behavior 5 (1966), 193– 197.
 9. The experiment on how rereading does not produce much 
 benefi t in later retention is from A. A. Callender & M. A. Mc-
Daniel, The limited benefi ts of rereading educational texts, 
Contemporary Educational Psychology 34 (2009), 30– 41.
 10. The survey showing that students prefer to reread as a study 
strategy is from Karpicke et al., Metacognitive strategies. Data 
 were also taken from J. McCabe, Metacognitive awareness of 
learning strategies in undergraduates, Memory & Cognition 
39 (2010), 462– 476.
 11. Illusions of knowing will be a theme throughout this book. A 
general reference is Thomas Gilovich, How We Know What 
Isn’t So: The Fallibility of Human Reason in Everyday Life 
(New York: Free Press, 1991).
 12. R. J. Sternberg, E. L. Grigorenko, & L. Zhang, Styles of learning 
and thinking matter in instruction and assessment, Perspectives 
on Psychological Science 3 (2008), 486– 506.
 13. The project at Columbia Middle School is reported in M. A. 
McDaniel, P. K. Agarwal, B. J. Huelser, K. B. McDermott, & 
H. L. Roediger (2011). Test- enhanced learning in a middle 
school science classroom: The effects of quiz frequency and 
placement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 103, 399– 414.

Notes to Pages 20–32 
ê 259
 14. The concept of testing as a learning tool is described in detail 
in Chapter 2. A general reference on material in this chapter 
(and other educational applications of cognitive psychology 
to education) is M. A. McDaniel & A. A. Callender, Cogni-
tion, memory, and education, in H. L. Roediger, Cognitive 
Psychology of Memory, vol. 2 of Learning and Memory: 
A  Comprehensive Reference (Oxford: Elsevier, 2008), pp. 
819– 844.
 2. To Learn, Retrieve
 1. Peter Brown interview of Michael Ebersold, December 31, 
2011, Wabasha, MN. All quotes from Ebersold are from this 
interview.
 2. The early work on forgetting curves was published by Her-
mann Ebbinghaus in 1885 in a book translated into En glish as 
On Memory in 1913. The most recent version is H. Ebbing-
haus, Memory: A contribution to experimental psychology 
(New York: Dover, 1964). Ebbinghaus is often viewed as the 
“father” of the scientifi c study of memory.
 3. The quotes from Aristotle and Bacon are from H. L. Roediger 
& J. D. Karpicke, The power of testing memory: Basic research 
and implications for educational practice, Perspectives on Psy-
chological Science 1 (2006), 181– 210.
 4. Benedict Carey, “Forget what you know about good study 
habits,” New York Times, September 7, 2010. The study re-
ported in this article was H. L. Roediger & J. D. Karpicke, 
Test- enhanced learning: Taking memory tests improves long- 
term retention, Psychological Science 17 (2006), 249– 255.
 5. A. I. Gates, Recitation as a factor in memorizing, Archives of 
Psychology 6 (1917) and H. F. Spitzer, Studies in retention, 
Journal of Educational Psychology 30 (1939), 641– 656. These 
two large- scale studies with children in elementary and middle 
school  were among the fi rst to document that taking a test or 
reciting material appearing in didactic texts improved reten-
tion for that material.
 6. The study involving repeated testing versus repeated studying 
was E. Tulving, The effects of pre sen ta tion and recall of material 

Notes to Pages 33–35 
ê 260
in free- recall learning, Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal 
Behavior 6 (1967), 175– 184. The study involving amounts of 
forgetting being reduced from testing is M. A. Wheeler & H. L. 
Roediger, Disparate effects of repeated testing: Reconciling 
Ballard’s (1913) and Bartlett’s (1932) results, Psychological 
Science 3 (1992), 240– 245.
 7. The positive effects of generation appear in L. L. Jacoby, On 
interpreting the effects of repetition: Solving a problem versus 
remembering a solution, Journal of Verbal Learning and Ver-
bal Behavior 17 (1978), 649– 667. This laboratory experi-
ment demonstrated that generation of target information does 
not have to be exceptionally challenging in order for genera-
tion to produce better retention relative to reviewing informa-
tion to be learned.
 8. Two papers describing the research at Columbia Middle School 
are H. L. Roediger, P. K. Agarwal, M. A. McDaniel, & K. Mc-
Dermott, Test- enhanced learning in the classroom: Long- term 
improvements from quizzing, Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: Applied 17 (2011), 382– 395, and M. A. McDaniel, P. K. 
Agarwal, B. J. Huelser, K. B. McDermott, & H. L. Roediger, 
Test- enhanced learning in a middle school science classroom: 
The effects of quiz frequency and placement, Journal of Edu-
cational Psychology 103 (2011), 399– 414. These companion 
papers  were the fi rst to report well- controlled experiments 
on the benefi ts of quizzing for middle school students’ per for-
mances on classroom exams in social studies and science. The 
fi ndings demonstrated that quizzing produced a signifi cant 
improvement relative to no- quizzing or directed review of tar-
get concepts on unit exams and on cumulative semester and 
end- of- year exams. In addition, in some cases a single well- 
placed review quiz produced benefi ts on the exams that  were 
as robust as several repeated quizzes. For an interesting view 
of this project by one of the lead researchers, the fi rst teacher 
and the fi rst principal involved, see P. K. Agarwal, P. M. Bain, & 
R. W. Chamberlain, The value of applied research: Retrieval 
practice improves classroom learning and recommendations 
from a teacher, a principal, and a scientist. Educational Psy-
chology Review 24 (2012), 437– 448.

Notes to Pages 37–40 
ê 261
 9. Peter Brown interview of Roger Chamberlain, October 27, 
2011, Columbia Middle School, Illinois. All quotes from Cham-
berlain are from this interview.
 10. Peter Brown interview of Andrew Sobel, December 22, 
2011, St. Louis, Missouri. All quotes from Sobel are from this 
interview.
 11. The experiments described  here are by H. L. Roediger & 
J. D. Karpicke, Test- enhanced learning: Taking memory tests 
improves long- term retention, Psychological Science 17 
(2006), 249– 255. Experiments showing that recall of stud-
ied prose passages produced better 2- day and one- week 
retention than did restudy of the passages. For an earlier 
study with the same outcome using word lists, see C. P. 
Thompson, S. K. Wenger, & C. A. Bartling, How recall facili-
tates subsequent recall: A reappraisal. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory 4 (1978), 
210– 221. This experiment showed that massing study was 
better than practicing retrieval on an immediate test but not 
a delayed test.
 12. Many studies exist on the effects of feedback. One is A. C. But-
ler & H. L. Roediger, Feedback enhances the positive effects 
and reduces the negative effects of multiple- choice testing. 
Memory & Cognition 36 (2008), 604– 616. The experiments 
show that feedback strengthens the effects of testing alone, 
and that feedback may be more benefi cial when it’s slightly 
delayed. The authors also showed that that feedback enhances 
the positive effects and reduces the negative effects of multiple- 
choice testing. For motor skills, a classic reference is A. W. Sal-
moni, R. A. Schmidt, and C. B. Walter, Knowledge of results 
and motor learning: A review and critical reappraisal. Psycho-
logical Bulletin 95 (1984), 355– 386. The authors proposed 
the guidance hypothesis of feedback effects on motor learning: 
Frequent immediate feedback can be detrimental to long- term 
learning— even though it helps immediate performance— 
because it provides a crutch during practice that is no longer 
present on a delayed test.
 13. The open- book test study was P. K. Agarwal, J. D. Karpicke, 
S. H. K. Kang, H. L. Roediger, & K. B. McDermott, Examining 

Notes to Pages 41–42 
ê 262
the testing effect with open- and closed- book tests, Applied 
Cognitive Psychology 22 (2008), 861– 876.
 14. Studies comparing the types of tests are S. H. Kang, K. B. Mc-
Dermott, H. L. Roediger, Test format and corrective feedback 
modify the effect of testing on long- term retention. Eu ro pe an 
Journal of Cognitive Psychology 19 (2007), 528– 558, and 
M. A. McDaniel, J. L. Anderson, M. H. Derbish, & N. Morri-
sette, Testing the testing effect in the classroom. Eu ro pe an 
Journal of Cognitive Psychology 19 (2007), 494– 513. These 
parallel experiments, one conducted in the laboratory and one 
in a college course, showed that a short- answer quiz with feed-
back produced better gains on fi nal tests than a recognition 
quiz with feedback. The implication is that the testing effect is 
more robust when more effort is required for retrieval, as it 
typically is for short- answer questions than for multiple choice 
questions. However, some studies have shown that multiple 
choice tests, especially when given repeatedly, can have as 
much positive effect in the classroom as a short- answer test; 
see K. B. McDermott, P. K. Agarwal, L. D’Antonio, H. L. Roed-
iger, & M. A. McDaniel, Both multiple- choice and short- 
answer quizzes enhance later exam per for mance in middle and 
high school classes, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Ap-
plied (in press).
 15. These studies examined students’ use of testing as a study 
strategy: J. D. Karpicke, A. C. Butler, & H. L. Roediger, III, 
Metacognitive strategies in student learning: Do students 
practice retrieval when they study on their own?, Memory 17 
(2009), 471– 479, and N. Kornell & R. A. Bjork, The promise 
and perils of self regulated study, Psychonomic Bulletin & 
Review 14 (2007), 219– 224. These studies reported the sur-
veys of college students’ use of retrieval practice as study 
technique.
 16. Taking a test— even when one fails to correctly recall informa-
tion on it— enhances learning from a new study episode. See 
K. M. Arnold & K. B. McDermott, Test- potentiated learning: 
Distinguishing between the direct and indirect effects of tests, 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and 
Cognition 39 (2013), 940– 945.

Notes to Pages 43–48 
ê 263
 17. This is a study of frequent low- stakes testing: F. C. Leeming, 
The exam- a-day procedure improves per for mance in psychol-
ogy classes, Teaching of Psychology 29 (2002), 210– 212. The 
author found that in sections in which he gave students a short 
test at the start of every class the students attended class more 
often and felt that they studied more and learned more than 
students in classes with only four tests throughout the semes-
ter. Final test per for mance for the different sections (quiz a day 
or no quiz a day) confi rmed students’ impressions. Another 
interesting study conducted in a classroom is K. B. Lyle & N. 
A. Crawford, Retrieving essential material at the end of lec-
tures improves per for mance on statistics exams, Teaching of 
Psychology 38 (2011), 94– 97.
Two reviews of research on retrieval practice and testing ap-
pear in H. L. Roediger & J. D. Karpicke, The power of testing 
memory: Basic research and implications for educational prac-
tice, Perspectives on Psychological Science 1 (2006), 181– 210. 
This paper represents a comprehensive review of laboratory 
and classroom studies over nearly one hundred years of re-
search, showing that testing can be a powerful learning tool. A 
more recent review points to many benefi ts of frequent testing 
in addition to the direct benefi t from retrieval practice: H. L. 
Roediger, M. A. Smith, & A. L. Putnam, Ten benefi ts of testing 
and their applications to educational practice, in J. Mestre & 
B. H. Ross (eds.), Psychology of Learning and Motivation (San 
Diego: Elsevier Academic Press, 2012). This chapter provides 
a summary of the host of potential benefi ts of using testing as 
a learning technique.
 3. Mix Up Your Practice
 1. The report of the beanbag study can be found in R. Kerr & B. 
Booth, Specifi c and varied practice of motor skill, Perceptual 
and Motor Skills 46 (1978), 395– 401.
 2. Many well- controlled experiments conducted with a variety of 
materials and training tasks provide solid evidence that massed 
practice (doing the same thing over and over repeatedly, a 
strategy often preferred by learners) is inferior to spacing and 

Notes to Pages 48–53 
ê 264
interleaving of practice for learning and retention. A review of 
the literature on the spacing effect in memory can be found in 
N. J. Cepeda, H. Pashler, E. Vul, J. T. Wixted, & D. Rohrer, Dis-
tributed practice in verbal recall tasks: A review and quantita-
tive synthesis, Psychological Bulletin 132 (2006), 354– 380.
 3. The surgery study is C-A. E. Moulton, A. Dubrowski, H. Mac-
Rae, B. Graham, E. Grober, & R. Reznick, Teaching surgical 
skills: What kind of practice makes perfect?, Annals of Sur-
gery 244 (2006), 400– 409. This study randomly assigned sur-
gical residents to either a normal daylong intensive lesson on a 
surgical procedure or to an experimental lesson that spaced 
four short periods of instruction over several weeks. The 
fi ndings, showing better retention and application of the sur-
gical techniques after spaced instruction, prompted the medical 
school to reexamine their standard instructional procedure of 
cramming instruction on a par tic u lar surgical technique into 
one intensive session.
 4. The study showing the benefi t of interleaving in mathematics 
problems is D. Rohrer & K. Taylor, The shuffl ing of mathe-
matics problems improves learning, Instructional Science 35 
(2007), 481– 498. The standard practice in mathematics text-
books is to cluster practice problems by problem type. This 
laboratory experiment demonstrated that this standard prac-
tice produced inferior per for mance on a fi nal test in which 
new problems of each problem type  were given relative to a 
practice procedure in which the practice problems from differ-
ent problem types  were shuffl ed (interleaved).
 5. The study relating differences in practice strategies to differ-
ences in motor- memory consolidation was by S. S. Kantak, K. 
J. Sullivan, B. E. Fisher, B. J. Knowlton, & C. J. Winstein, Neural 
substrates of motor memory consolidation depend on practice 
structure, Nature Neuroscience 13 (2010), 923– 925.
 6. The anagram study was by M. K. Goode, L. Geraci, & H. L. 
Roediger, Superiority of variable to repeated practice in trans-
fer on anagram solution, Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 15 
(2008), 662– 666. These researchers gave subjects practice on 
solving anagrams for a set of words: one group was given the 
same anagram for a par tic u lar target word on every practice 

Notes to Pages 54–60 
ê 265
trial (massed practice), whereas another group was given a dif-
ferent anagram for a par tic u lar target word on each practice 
trial (varied practice). Surprisingly, varied practice produced 
better per for mance on a fi nal trial in which the anagrams  were 
the very ones that  were practiced in the other group that had 
practiced the tested anagram repeatedly.
 7. The study about learning of artists’ styles was by N. Kornell & 
R. A. Bjork, Learning concepts and categories: Is spacing the 
“enemy of induction”?, Psychological Science 19 (2008), 585– 
592. In these experiments, college students attempted to learn 
the painting style of a number of relatively unknown artists. 
Students learned the styles better when the paintings of the artists 
 were interleaved compared to when each artist’s paintings  were 
massed during learning. Yet, at odds with the objective learning 
outcomes, most of the learners insisted that they learned better 
with the massed pre sen ta tions. Another informative study is 
S. H. K. Kang & H. Pashler, Learning painting styles: Spacing 
is advantageous when it promotes discriminative contrast, Ap-
plied Cognitive Psychology 26 (2012), 97– 103, which showed 
that mixing the examples of paintings helped to highlight the 
differences among paint ers’ styles (what we are calling discrimi-
native contrast).
 8. The fi nding that improving discrimination among examples 
contributes to conceptual learning is from L. L. Jacoby, C. N. 
Wahlheim, & J. H. Coane, Test- enhanced learning of natural 
concepts: effects on recognition memory, classifi cation, and 
metacognition, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition 36 (2010), 1441– 1442.
 9. Peter Brown interview of Doulas Larsen, December 23, 2011, 
St. Louis, MO. All quotes from Larsen are from this interview.
 10. Doug Larsen’s work can be found in D. P. Larsen, A. C. Butler, & 
H. L. Roediger, Repeated testing improves long- term retention 
relative to repeated study: a randomized controlled trial. Med-
ical Education 43 (2009), 1174– 1181; D. P. Larsen, A. C. But-
ler, A. L. Lawson, & H. L. Roediger, The importance of seeing 
the patient: Test- enhanced learning with standardized patients 
and written tests improves clinical application of knowledge, 
Advances in Health Science Education 18 (2012), 1– 17; and 

Notes to Pages 62–69 
ê 266
D. P. Larsen, A. C. Butler, & H. L. Roediger, Comparative ef-
fects of test- enhanced learning and self- explanation on long- 
term retention, Medical Education 47, 7 (2013), 674– 682.
 11. Peter Brown interview of Vince Dooley, February 18, 2012, 
Athens, GA. All quotes of Dooley are from this interview.
 12. Psychologists interested in learning have long distinguished 
between momentary per for mance and underlying learning (as 
mea sured after a delay with intervening reminders). As a simple 
example, someone might tell you that James Monroe was the 
fi fth US president. You would probably be able to answer cor-
rectly if asked about the fi fth president for the rest of the day 
or the week. That would be due to having just heard it (thus 
boosting the momentary strength or what the psychologists 
Robert and Elizabeth Bjork call retrieval strength). However, 
if someone asks you a year later about the fi fth president, this 
would be a mea sure of habit strength or, as the Bjorks call it, 
storage strength. See R. A. Bjork & E. L. Bjork, A new theory 
of disuse and an old theory of stimulus fl uctuation, in A. F. 
Healy, S. M. Kosslyn, & R. M. Shiffrin (eds.), From learning 
pro cesses to cognitive pro cesses: Essays in honor of William 
K. Estes (vol. 2, pp. 35– 67) (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1992). 
For a recent discussion, see N. C. Soderstrom & R. A. Bjork, 
Learning versus per for mance, in D. S. Dunn (ed.), Oxford 
Bibliographies online: Psychology (New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2013) doi 10. 1093/obo/9780199828340-0081.
 4. Embrace Diffi culties
 1. All quotes of Mia Blundetto are from telephone conversations 
between Peter Brown, in Austin, TX, and Blundetto, at Camp 
Fuji, Japan, on February 9 and March 2, 2013.
 2. The phrase “desirable diffi culties in learning” originated in 
the article R. A. Bjork & E. L. Bjork, A new theory of disuse 
and an old theory of stimulus fl uctuation, in A. F. Healy, S. M. 
Kosslyn, & R. M. Shiffrin (eds.), From learning pro cesses to 
cognitive pro cesses: Essays in honor of William K. Estes (vol. 
2, pp. 35– 67) (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1992). The idea seems 
counterintuitive— how can making a task more diffi cult lead 

Notes to Pages 73–78 
ê 267
to it’s being learned better and retained longer? The rest of this 
chapter explains this puzzle and why it seems to arise.
 3. Psychologists distinguish among three stages in the learning 
/memory pro cess: Encoding (or acquisition of information); 
storage (per sis tence of information over time); and retrieval 
(later use of the information). Any time you successfully re-
membered an event, all three stages  were intact. Forgetting (or 
the occurrence of false memories— retrieving a wrong “mem-
ory” of some event but believing it to be right) can occur at any 
stage.
 4. For a classic article on consolidation, see J. L. McGaugh, 
 Memory— a century of consolidation, Science 287 (2000), 
248– 251. For a somewhat more recent and lengthy review, see 
Y. Dudai, The neurobiology of consolidations, or, how stable 
is the engram?, Annual Review of Psychology 55 (2004), 51– 
86. For evidence that sleep and dreaming helps with memory 
consolidation, see E. J. Wamsley, M. Tucker, J. D. Payne, J. A. 
Benavides, & R. Stickgold, Dreaming of a learning task is as-
sociated with enhanced sleep- dependent memory consolida-
tion, Current Biology 20 (2010), 850– 855.
 5. Endel Tulving emphasized the critical role of retrieval cues in 
remembering by stressing that remembering is always a prod-
uct of both the information stored (the memory trace) and the 
cues in the environment that might remind you of the infor-
mation. With stronger cues, even weaker traces become acces-
sible for recall. See E. Tulving, Cue dependent forgetting, Ameri-
can Scientist 62 (1974), 74– 82.
 6. Robert Bjork has emphasized the role of forgetting of an 
original event to some degree as aiding the amount of learning 
from a second pre sen ta tion of the same event. The power of 
spacing of events on memory (the spacing effect) is one exam-
ple. For examples see N. C. Soderstrom & R. A. Bjork, Learn-
ing versus per for mance, in D. S. Dunn (ed.), Oxford Bibliog-
raphies in Psychology (New York: Oxford University Press, in 
press).
 7. The problem of old learning interfering with new learning is 
called negative transfer in psychology. For evidence on how 
forgetting of old information can help in learning of new 

Notes to Pages 79–82 
ê 268
information, see R. A. Bjork, On the symbiosis of remember-
ing, forgetting, and learning, in A. S. Benjamin (ed.), Success-
ful Remembering and Successful Forgetting: A Festschrift in 
Honor of Robert A. Bjork (pp. 1– 22) (New York: Psychology 
Press, 2010).
 8. The situation where information still exists in memory yet 
cannot be actively recalled has been emphasized as a key prob-
lem in remembering (Tulving, Cue dependent forgetting). Stored 
information is said to be available, whereas retrievable informa-
tion is accessible. The instance we give in this chapter of an old 
address that a person cannot recall but could easily recognize 
among several possibilities is an example of the power of re-
trieval cues in making available memories accessible to con-
scious awareness. Recognition tests usually provide more pow-
erful cues than recall tests.
 9. The study of baseball players practicing hitting was reported 
in K. G. Hall, D. A. Domingues, & R. Cavazos, Contextual in-
terference effects with skilled baseball players, Perceptual and 
Motor Skills 78 (1994), 835– 841.
 10. “Reload” is the term the Bjorks use to indicate reconstruction 
of a concept or skill after some delay. A good, accessible source 
for these ideas is E. L. Bjork & R. A. Bjork, Making things 
hard on yourself, but in a good way: Creating desirable diffi -
culties to enhance learning, in M. A. Gernsbacher, R. W. Pew, 
L. M. Hough, & J. R. Pomerantz (eds.), Psychology and the real 
world: Essays illustrating fundamental contributions to soci-
ety (pp. 56– 64) (New York: Worth, 2009).
 11. The term reconsolidation has several different uses in psychol-
ogy and neuroscience. The core meaning is the reviving of 
an original memory and then having it consolidate again (as 
in retrieval practice). However, the original memory can be 
changed by reconsolidation if new information is introduced 
when the original memory is revived. Reconsolidation has been 
studied by both neurobiologists and cognitive psychologists. 
Some entry points into this literature are D. Schiller, M. H. 
Monfi ls, C. M. Raio, D. C. Johnson, J. E. LeDoux, & E. A. 
Phelps, Preventing the return of fear in humans using recon-
solidation update mechanisms, Nature 463 (2010), 49– 53, 

Notes to Pages 85–90 
ê 269
and B. Finn & H. L. Roediger, Enhancing retention through 
reconsolidation: Negative emotional arousal following re-
trieval enhances later recall, Psychological Science 22 (2011), 
781– 786.
 12. For the research on interleaving, see M. S. Birnbaum, N. Kornell, 
E. L. Bjork, & R. A. Bjork, Why interleaving enhances inductive 
learning: The roles of discrimination and retrieval, Memory & 
Cognition 41 (2013), 392– 402.
 13. Several studies have shown that although making text more 
diffi cult to read by leaving out letters or using an unusual 
typography may slow reading, readers remember more. See 
M. A. McDaniel, G. O. Einstein, P. K. Dunay, & R. Cobb, 
Encoding diffi culty and memory: Toward a unifying theory, 
Journal of Memory and Language 25 (1986), 645– 656, and C. 
Diemand- Yauman, D. Oppenheimer, & E. B. Vaughn, Fortune 
favors the bold (and the italicized): Effects of disfl uency on 
educational outcomes, Cognition 118 (2010), 111– 115. The 
study in which the outline either matched or mismatched the 
chapter is S. M. Mannes & W. Kintsch, Knowledge or ga ni za-
tion and text or ga ni za tion, Cognition and Instruction 4 
(1987), 91– 115.
 14. Studies showing that generation can improve retention include 
L. L. Jacoby, On interpreting the effects of repetition: Solving 
a problem versus remembering a solution, Journal of Verbal 
Learning and Verbal Behavior 17 (1978), 649– 667, and N. J. 
Slamecka & P. Graf, The generation effect: Delineation of a 
phenomenon, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human 
Learning and Memory 4 (1978), 592– 604. More recently, the 
act of generation before a learning episode has also been shown 
to enhance per for mance; see L. E. Richland, N. Kornell, & L. S. 
Kao, The pretesting effect: Do unsuccessful retrieval attempts 
enhance learning? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Ap-
plied 15 (2009), 243– 257.
 15. The cited study of write- to- learn is K. J. Gingerich, J. M. Bugg, 
S. R. Doe, C. A. Rowland, T. L. Richards, S. A. Tompkins, & 
M. A. McDaniel, Active pro cessing via write- to- learn assign-
ments: Learning and retention benefi ts in introductory psychol-
ogy, Teaching of Psychology, (in press).

Notes to Pages 90–102 
ê 270
 16. B. F. Skinner had many infl uential and interesting ideas about 
learning in schools as well as on other topics in American soci-
ety. His important book Science and Human Behavior can be 
downloaded at no cost from the website of the B. F. Skinner 
Foundation. See also B. F. Skinner, Teaching machines, Science 
128 (1958), 969– 977. Errorless learning does seem important 
in teaching memory- impaired people, but for most educational 
situations, errors (so long as they are corrected with feedback) 
do not hurt and may even aid learning. For example, see B. J. 
Huelser & J. Metcalfe, Making related errors facilitates learn-
ing, but learners do not know it, Memory & Cognition 40 
(2012), 514– 527.
 17. The French study on schoolchildren solving anagrams appears 
in F. Autin & J. C. Croziet, Improving working memory effi -
ciency by reframing metacognitive interpretation of task diffi -
culty, Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 141 (2012), 
610– 618. For a story on the Festival of Errors, see Lizzy Davis, 
“Paris Stages ‘Festival of Errors’ to Teach French Schoolchildren 
How to Think,” Guardian, July 21, 2010,  http:// www .guardian 
.co .uk /world /2010 /jul /21 /france -paris -festival -of -errors, ac-
cessed October 22, 2013.
 18. Peter Brown telephone interview of Bonnie Blodgett, March 
10, 2013, St. Paul, MN. All quotes of Blodgett are from this 
interview.
 19. The quote from the Bjorks comes from E. L. Bjork & R. A. 
Bjork, Making things hard on yourself, but in a good way: 
Creating desirable diffi culties to enhance learning, in M. A. 
Gernsbacher, R. W. Pew, L. M. Hough, and J. R. Pomerantz 
(eds.), Psychology and the real world: Essays illustrating funda-
mental contributions to society (pp. 56– 64) (New York: Worth, 
2009).
 5. Avoid Illusions of Knowing
 1. The fi eld of metacognition— what we know about what we 
know and how we assess our performance— is a burgeoning 
one in psychology. A good general reference about metacog-
nition is John Dunlosky and Janet Metcalfe, Metacognition 

Notes to Pages 104–109 
ê 271
(Los Angeles: Sage, 2009). Daniel Kahneman, Thinking Fast 
and Slow (New York: Farrar, Strauss and Giroux, 2011), also 
includes a discussion of many illusions to which the mind 
falls prey. For an earlier discussion of many illusions, see 
Thomas Gilovich, How We Know What Isn’t So: The Fallibility 
of Human Reason in Everyday Life (New York: Free Press, 
1991). For a briefer review, see H. L. Roediger, III, & A. C. 
Butler, Paradoxes of remembering and knowing, in N. Kapur, 
A. Pascual- Leone, & V. Ramachandran (eds.), The Paradoxi-
cal Brain (pp. 151– 176) (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2011).
 2. Peter Brown interview of David Garman, December 12, 
2011, Minneapolis, MN. All quotes of Garman are from this 
interview.
 3. The China Airlines incident is reported in: National Transpor-
tation Safety Board, “Aircraft Accident report– China Airlines 
Boeing 747- SP N4522V, 300 Nautical Miles Northwest of San 
Francisco, California, February 19, 1985,” March 29, 1986, and 
can be found at  http:// www .rvs .uni -bielefeld .de /publications 
/Incidents /DOCS /ComAndRep /ChinaAir /AAR8603 .html, ac-
cessed October 24, 2013.
The report of the National Transportation Safety Board’s 
investigation into the Carnahan accident is reported by: D. A. 
Lombardo, “ ‘Spatial disorientation’ caused Carnahan crash,” 
Aviation International News, AINonline, July 2002, and can 
be found at:  http:// www .ainonline .com /aviation -news /aviation 
-international -news /2008 -04 -16 /spatial -disorientation -caused 
-carnahan -crash, accessed October 24, 2013.
The report of the National Transportation Safety Board’s 
investigation into the J. F. Kennedy Jr. accident is reported 
by: N. Sigelman, “NTSB says spatial disorientation caused 
Cape Air crash,” Martha’s Vineyard Times, mntimes .com, and 
can be found at  http:// www .mvtimes .com /ntsb -says -spatial 
-disorientation -caused -cape -air -crash -960 /, accessed October 
24, 2013.
 4. E. Morris, “The anosognosic’s dilemma: Something’s wrong 
but you’ll never know what it is” (pt. 5), New York Times, June 
24, 2010.

Notes to Pages 111–115 
ê 272
 5. L. L. Jacoby, R. A. Bjork, & C. M. Kelley, Illusions of compre-
hension, competence, and remembering, in D. Druckman & 
R. A. Bjork (eds.), Learning, remembering, believing: Enhancing 
human per for mance (pp. 57– 80) (Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press, 1994).
 6. The Carol Harris/Helen Keller study is reported in R. A. Sulin & 
D. J. Dooling, Intrusion of a thematic idea in retention of 
prose, Journal of Experimental Psycholog 103 (1974), 255– 
262. For an overview on memory illusions, see H. L. Roediger & 
K. B. McDermott, Distortions of memory, in F. I.M. Craik & 
E. Tulving (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Memory (pp. 149– 
164) (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000).
 7. Imagination infl ation has been shown both in studies of mem-
ories from early life and in laboratory studies. Two of the 
original references for each type of study are M. Garry, C. G.
Manning, E. F. Loftus, & S. J. Sherman, Imagination infl ation: 
Imagining a childhood event infl ates confi dence that it occurred, 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 3 (1996), 208– 214, and L. M. 
Goff & H. L. Roediger, Imagination infl ation for action events: 
Repeated imaginings lead to illusory recollections, Memory & 
Cognition 26 (1998), 20– 33.
 8. The leading questions experiment is E. F. Loftus & J. C. Palmer, 
Reconstruction of automobile destruction: An example of the 
interaction between language and memory, Journal of Verbal 
Learning and Verbal Behavior 13 (1974), 585– 589.
 9. One article on the dangers of hypnosis on memory is P. A. Reg-
ister & J. F. Kihlstrom, Hypnosis and interrogative suggest-
ibility, Personality and Individual Differences 9 (1988), 549– 
558. For an overview of issues in memory relevant to legal 
situations, see H. L. Roediger & D. A. Gallo, Pro cesses af-
fecting accuracy and distortion in memory: An overview, in 
M. L. Eisen, G. S. Goodman, & J. A. Quas (eds.), Memory and 
Suggestibility in the Forensic Interview (pp. 3– 28) (Mah-
wah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2002).
 10. The story about Don Thomson can be found in B. Bower, 
Gone but not forgotten: Scientists uncover pervasive uncon-
scious infl uences on memory, Science News 138, 20 (1990), 
312– 314.

Notes to Pages 116–123 
ê 273
 11. The curse of knowledge, hindsight bias, and other topics are 
covered in Jacoby, Bjork, & Kelley, Illusions of comprehen-
sion, competence, and remembering, and in many other places. 
A relatively recent review of the effects of fl uency can be found 
in D. M. Oppenheimer, The secret life of fl uency, Trends in 
Cognitive Science 12 (2008), 237– 241.
 12. Social contagion of memory: H. L. Roediger, M. L. Meade, & 
E. Bergman, Social contagion of memory, Psychonomic Bulle-
tin & Review 8 (2001), 365– 371
 13. Two important reviews of the false consensus effect are found in 
L. Ross, The false consensus effect: An egocentric bias in social 
perception and attribution pro cesses, Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology 13 (1977), 279– 301, and G. Marks, N. Miller, 
Ten years of research on the false- consensus effect: An empirical 
and theoretical review, Psychological Bulletin 102 (1987), 72– 90.
 14. Flashbulb memories of 9/11: J. M. Talarico & D. C. Rubin, 
Confi dence, not consistency, characterizes fl ashbulb memories, 
Psychological Science 14 (2003), 455– 461, and W. Hirst, E. A. 
Phelps, R. L. Buckner, A. Cue, D.E. Gabrieli & M.K. Johnson 
Long- term memory for the terrorist attack of September 11: 
Flashbulb memories, event memories and the factors that in-
fl uence their retention, Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
General 138 (2009), 161– 176.
 15. Eric Mazur material comes from his YouTube lecture “Confes-
sions of a converted lecturer,” available at  www .youtube .com 
/watch ?v=WwslBPj8GgI, accessed October 23, 2013.
 16. The curse of knowledge study about guessing tunes tapped 
out is from L. Newton, Overconfi dence in the communication 
of intent: Heard and unheard melodies (Ph.D. diss., Stanford 
University, 1990).
 17. The Dunning- Kruger effect originated with Justin Kruger & 
David Dunning, Unskilled and unaware of it: How diffi culties 
in recognizing one’s own incompetence lead to infl ated self- 
assessments, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 77 
(1999), 1121– 1134. Many later experimental studies and arti-
cles have been based on this one. See D. Dunning, Self- Insight: 
Roadblocks and Detours on the Path to Knowing Thyself (New 
York: Psychology Press, 2005).

Notes to Pages 123–131 
ê 274
 18. Stories on student- directed learning: Susan Dominus, “Play- 
Dough? Calculus? At the Manhattan Free School, Anything 
Goes,” New York Times, October 4, 2010, and Asha Anchan, 
“The DIY Approach to Education,” Minneapolis StarTribune, 
July 8, 2012.
 19. Studies showing that students drop fl ashcards sooner than 
they should for long- term learning include N. Kornell & R. A. 
Bjork, Optimizing self- regulated study: The benefi ts— and 
costs— of dropping fl ashcards, Memory 16 (2008), 125– 136, 
and J. D. Karpicke, Metacognitive control and strategy selec-
tion: Deciding to practice retrieval during learning, Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General 138 (2009), 469– 486.
 20. Eric Mazur has published Peer Instruction: A User’s Manual, 
about his approach to teaching. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice- Hall, 1997). In addition, he exemplifi es his approach 
in an engaging YouTube lecture, “Confessions of a converted 
lecturer,” described in Note 15. Again, it is  http:// www .youtube 
.com /watch ?v=WwslBPj8GgI, accessed October 23, 2013.
 21. The Dunning quote comes from E. Morris, “The anosognosic’s 
dilemma: Something’s wrong but you’ll never know what it is” 
(pt. 5), New York Times, June 24, 2010.
 22. Peter Brown interview of Catherine Johnson, December 13, 
2011, Minneapolis, MN.
 23. Much of this chapter is about how to regulate one’s learning 
while avoiding various illusions and biases based on fl uency, 
hindsight bias, and the like. An excellent recent article on self- 
regulated learning that would prove useful to anyone seeking 
more knowledge on these topics is R. A. Bjork, J. Dunlosky, & 
N. Kornell, Self- regulated learning: Beliefs, techniques, and il-
lusions, Annual Review of Psychology 64 (2013), 417– 444.
 6. Get Beyond Learning Styles
 1. Francis Bacon (1561– 1626) was an En glish phi los o pher and 
statesman. The full quote is “All rising a to great place is by a 
winding stair; and if there be factions, it is good to side a man’s 
self, whilst he is in the rising, and to balance himself when he 
is placed.” From Bacon’s essay Of Great Place.

Notes to Pages 133–148 
ê 275
 2. Peter Brown interview of Bruce Hendry, August 27, 2012, St. 
Paul, MN. All quotes of Hendry are from this interview.
 3. Betsy Morris, Lisa Munoz, and Patricia Neering, “Overcom-
ing dyslexia,” Fortune, May, 2002, 54– 70.
 4. Annie Murphy Paul, “The upside of dyslexia,” New York 
Times, February 4, 2012. The work by Geiger and Lettvin is 
described in G. Geiger & J. Y. Lettvin, Developmental dyslexia: 
A different perceptual strategy and how to learn a new strat-
egy for reading, Saggi: Child Development and Disabilities 26 
(2000), 73– 89.
 5. Survey is listed in F. Coffi eld, D. Moseley, E. Hall, Learning styles 
and pedagogy in post- 16 learning, a systematic and critical re-
view, 2004, Learning and Skills Research Centre, London; the 
quote by the student (“there’s no point in me reading a book”) is 
from same source, p. 137. The quote “a bedlam of contradictory 
claims” is from Michael Reynolds, Learning styles: a critique, 
Management Learning, June 1997, vol. 28 no. 2, p. 116.
 6. The material about learning styles is drawn largely from 
H. Pashler, M. A. McDaniel, D. Rohrer, & R. A. Bjork, Learning 
styles: A critical review of concepts and evidence, Psycho-
logical Science in the Public Interest 9 (2009), 105– 119. This 
article reviewed the published evidence bearing on whether 
learning is improved when the instructional method is matched 
to students’ learning styles relative to when the instructional 
method is not matched. Two important fi ndings  were that (1) 
there are very few studies that adopted the gold standard of 
performing controlled experiments, and (2) the few published 
experiments consistently found that matching instruction to 
learning style did not improve learning. One key conclusion is 
that more experimental research on this issue is needed, but at 
the moment there is little evidence for the existence of com-
monly postulated learning styles.
 7. An excellent text on classic views of intelligence is Earl Hunt, 
Human intelligence (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2010).
 8. Howard Gardner’s theory is described in his book Multiple 
Intelligences: New Horizons (New York: Basic Books, 2006), 
among other venues.

Notes to Pages 148–150 
ê 276
 9. The material on work by Robert Sternberg, Elena Grigorenko, 
and their colleagues comes from several sources. For a nice 
pre sen ta tion of the theory, see R. J. Sternberg, Grigorenko, E. L., 
& Zhang, L., Styles of learning and thinking in instruction 
and assessment, Perspectives on Psychological Science (2008) 
486– 506. Another interesting study by Sternberg, Grigorenko 
and colleagues identifi ed college students who showed much 
higher skill in either analytical, creative, or practical ability 
(relative to the other two abilities), and assigned them to dif-
ferent classes that focused on analytic instruction, creative in-
struction, or practical instruction. Students receiving instruc-
tion that matched their strongest ability tended to perform 
better on certain class- performance assessments than students 
who received mismatched instruction; see R. J. Sternberg, E. L. 
Grigorenko, M. Ferrari, & P. Clinkenbeard, A triarchic analy-
sis of an aptitude– treatment interaction, Eu ro pe an Journal of 
Psychological Assessment 15 (1999), 1– 11.
 10. The study of Brazilian children was T. N. Carraher, D. W. Car-
raher, & A. D. Schliemann, Mathematics in the streets and in 
the schools, British Journal of Developmental Psychology 3 
(1985), 21– 29. This fascinating study focused on fi ve children 
from very poor backgrounds who  were working on street cor-
ners or markets in Brazil. Per for mance was compared for simi-
lar multiplication problems presented in different contexts: the 
natural context in which the child was expert (e.g., selling 
coconuts, but role- played in the experiment), word problems 
phrased within a different context (e.g., selling bananas), or 
formal math problems without context. The children solved 
nearly 100 percent of the problems when presented in the nat-
ural context, fewer in the different context, and only about a 
third when presented as a formal problem. A key point is that 
the children used concrete grouping strategies to solve the 
natural context problems, but then switched to school- taught 
strategies (not yet well learned) when presented with the for-
mal problems. The mathematical strategies the children had 
developed  were not evident on an academically oriented test.
 11. The study of race handicappers is S. J. Ceci & J. K. Liker, A day 
at the races: A study of IQ, expertise, and cognitive complex-

Notes to Pages 152–155 
ê 277
ity, Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 115 (1986), 
255– 266. This study sampled harness racing fans, with some 
classifi ed as expert and some as less expert. The expert group 
and less expert group  were evenly matched on IQ, yet the ex-
pert group showed much better success at predicting outcomes 
of actual races and experimenter- contrived races. The experts’ 
success was related to their using an extremely complex system 
of weighting and combining the range of information related 
to the  horses and the race conditions.
 12. Dynamic testing: Robert Sternberg and Elena Grigorenko dis-
cuss this concept in Dynamic Testing: The Nature and Mea-
sure ment of Learning Potential (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2002).
 13. The fundamental work on structure building was begun by 
M. A. Gernsbacher, K. R. Varner, & M. E. Faust, Investigating 
differences in general comprehension skills, Journal of Ex-
perimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 16 
(1990), 430– 445. This article provides some of the elegant ex-
perimental work that contributed to the development of the 
structure- building theory— the idea that good comprehenders 
are able to construct a coherent, or ga nized repre sen ta tion of a 
narrative from many sources (either read, listened to, or seen 
in pictures), whereas less able comprehenders tend to construct 
many, somewhat fractionated repre sen ta tions of the narratives. 
This research further suggested that poor structure-builders, but 
not good structure-builders, have trouble inhibiting irrelevant 
information, which likely contributes to their fractionated (in-
effec tive) repre sen ta tions. Another relevant article is A. A. Cal-
lender & M. A. McDaniel, The benefi ts of embedded question 
adjuncts for low and high structure builders, Journal of Edu-
cational Psychology 99 (2007), 339– 348. They demonstrated 
that low structure-builders achieve less learning from stan-
dard school materials (textbook chapters) than do high 
structure-builders. However, embedding questions into chap-
ters to focus the low structure-builders on the important con-
cepts (and requiring them to answer the questions) boosted 
the low structure-builders to levels of learning enjoyed by high 
structure- builders.

Notes to Pages 157–158 
ê 278
 14. The discussion of learning concepts  here relies on two studies: 
T. Pachur, & H. Olsson, Type of learning task impacts per for-
mance and strategy selection in decision making, Cognitive Psy-
chology 65 (2012), 207– 240. The typical approach to studying 
conceptual learning in the laboratory is to provide one ex-
ample at a time, with learners attempting to learn the likely 
classifi cation of this example (e.g., given a case with a par tic-
u lar set of symptoms, what is the likely disease?). This experi-
ment modifi ed that procedure by presenting two examples 
simultaneously (e.g., two cases) and requiring learners to se-
lect which of the two would be most likely to refl ect a par-
tic u lar classifi cation. This comparative approach stimulated 
less focus on memorizing the examples and better extraction 
of the underlying rule by which the examples  were classifi ed. 
A similar theme to the one above, except that the focus was 
on transfer in problem solving, appears in M. L. Gick & K. J. 
Holyoak, Schema induction and analogical transfer, Cogni-
tive Psychology 15 (1983), 1– 38. Learners either studied one 
example of how to solve a par tic u lar problem or  were re-
quired to contrast two different kinds of problems to fi gure out 
the common elements of their solutions. The learners who 
contrasted two problems  were more likely to extract a gen-
eral solution scheme and transfer that scheme to successfully 
solve new problems than  were the learners who studied only 
one problem.
 15. The reference on rule learners and example learners is M. A. 
McDaniel, M. J. Cahill, M. Robbins, & C. Wiener, Individual 
differences in learning and transfer: Stable tendencies for learn-
ing exemplars versus abstracting rules, Journal of Experimen-
tal Psychology: General 143 (2014). Using laboratory learning 
tasks, this novel study revealed that some people tend to learn 
concepts by focusing on memorizing the par tic u lar examples 
and responses associated with the examples that are used to 
illustrate the concept (termed exemplar learners), whereas 
other learners focus on the underlying abstraction refl ected in 
the par tic u lar exemplars used to illustrate the concept (termed 
abstractors). Further, a par tic u lar individual’s concept- learning 
tendency persisted across quite different laboratory concept- 

Notes to Pages 163–168 
ê 279
learning tasks, suggesting that individuals may have a fairly 
stable predisposition toward exemplar learning versus ab-
straction across a range of conceptual- learning tasks. Of inter-
est, an initial result was that the abstractors on average achieved 
higher grades in an introductory college chemistry course than 
did the exemplar learners.
 7. Increase Your Abilities
 1. A good introduction to Walter Mischel’s classic research on 
delay in gratifi cation in children is W. Mischel, Y. Shoda, & 
M. L. Rodriguez, Delay of gratifi cation in children, Science 244 
(1989), 933– 938. For an accessible introduction for nonpsy-
chologists, see Jonah Lehrer, “Don’t! The secret of self- control,” 
New Yorker, May 18, 2009, 26– 32. For a 2011 update, see W. 
Mischel & O. Ayduk, Willpower in a cognitive- affective pro-
cessing system: The dynamics of delay of gratifi cation, in K. D. 
Vohs & R. F. Baumeister (eds.), Handbook of Self- Regulation: 
Research, Theory, and Applications (2nd ed., pp. 83– 105) 
(New York: Guilford, 2011).
 2. Accounts of Carson are reprinted at the website maintained 
by historian Bob Graham, whose antecedents  were among the 
original American settlers in California,  www .longcamp .com 
/kit _bio .html, accessed October 30, 2013, and are drawn from 
material published originally in the Washington  Union in the 
summer of 1847 and reprinted in Supplement to the Connecti-
cut Courant, July 3, 1847. Hampton Sides, Blood and Thunder 
(New York: Anchor Books, 2006), 125– 126, relates Fremont’s 
directing Carson on this journey.
 3. Research on brain plasticity: J. T. Bruer, Neural connections: 
Some you use, some you lose, Phi Delta Kappan 81, 4 (1999), 
264– 277. The Goldman- Rakic quote comes from Bruer’s article, 
which quotes from remarks she made before the Education 
Commission of the States. Further research on brain plasticity, 
with an emphasis on treatment of brain damage, may be found 
in D. G. Stein & S. W. Hoffman, Concepts of CNS plasticity in 
the context of brain damage and repair, Journal of Head Trauma 
Rehabilitation 18 (2003), 317– 341.

Notes to Pages 168–176 
ê 280
 4. H. T. Chugani, M. E. Phelps, & J. C. Mazziotta, Positron emis-
sion tomography study of human brain function development, 
Annals of Neurology 22 (1987), 487– 497.
 5. J. Cromby, T. Newton, and S. J. Williams, Neuroscience and 
subjectivity, Subjectivity 4 (2011), 215– 226.
 6. An accessible introduction to this work is Sandra Blakeslee, 
“New tools to help patients reclaim damaged senses,” New 
York Times, November 23, 2004.
 7. P. Bach- y-Rita, Tactile sensory substitution studies, Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences 1013 (2004), 83– 91.
 8. For work on myelination, see R. D. Fields, White matter matters, 
Scientifi c American 298 (2008), 42– 49, and R. D. Fields, My-
elination: An overlooked mechanism of synaptic plasticity?, 
Neuroscientist 11 (December 2005), 528– 531. For a more 
pop u lar exposition, see Daniel Coyle, The Talent Code (New 
York: Bantam, 2009).
 9. Some references on neurogenesis: P. S. Eriksson, E. Perfi lieva, 
T. Björk- Eriksson, A. M. Alborn, C. Nordborg, D. A. Peter-
son, & F. H. Gage, Neurogenesis in the adult human hippo-
campus, Nature Medicine 4 (1998), 1313– 1317; P. Taupin, 
Adult neurogenesis and neuroplasticity, Restorative Neurology 
and Neuroscience 24 (2006), 9– 15.
 10. The quote comes from Ann B. Barnet & Richard J. Barnet, 
The Youn gest Minds: Parenting and Genes in the Development 
of Intellect and Emotion (New York: Simon and Schuster, 
1998), 10.
 11. The Flynn effect is named for James Flynn, who fi rst reported 
on the trend for increased IQs in the twentieth century in devel-
oped nations in J. R. Flynn, Massive IQ gains in 14 nations: 
What IQ tests really mea sure, Psychological Bulletin 101 
(1987), 171– 191.
 12. This section draws heavily on Richard E. Nisbett, Intelligence 
and How to Get It (New York: Norton, 2009.)
 13. The study cited is J. Protzko, J. Aronson, & C. Blair, How to 
make a young child smarter: Evidence from the database of 
raising intelligence, Perspectives in Psychological Science 8 
(2013), 25– 40.

Notes to Pages 176–187 
ê 281
 14. The cited study is S. M. Jaeggi, M. Buschkuehl, J. Jonides, & 
W. J. Perrig, Improving fl uid intelligence with training on work-
ing memory, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
105 (2008), 6829– 6833.
 15. The failure to replicate the working memory training result 
appears in T. S. Redick, Z. Shipstead, T. L. Harrison, K. L. Hicks, 
D. E. Fried, D. Z. Hambrick, M. J. Kane, & R. W. Engle, No evi-
dence of intelligence improvement after working memory 
training: A randomized, placebo- controlled study, Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General 142, 2013), 359– 379.
 16. Carol Dweck’s research on growth mindsets is summarized in 
many places. See a nice summary by Marina Krakovsky, “The 
effort effect,” Stanford Magazine, March/April 2007. For two 
articles by Dweck, see H. Grant & C. S. Dweck, Clarifying 
achievement goals and their impact, Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology 85 (2003), 541– 553, and C. S. Dweck, The 
perils and promise of praise, Educational Leadership 65 (2007), 
34– 39. She also has a book, Mindset: The New Psychology of 
Success (New York: Ballantine Books, 2006).
 17. Dweck quote is from Krakovsky, “Effort effect.”
 18. The Dweck quotes are from Po Bronson, “How not to talk to 
your kids,” New York Times Magazine, February 11, 2007.
 19. Paul Tough, How Children Succeed (New York: Houghton 
Miffl in Harcourt, 2012).
 20. Anders Ericsson’s work on deliberate practice has been de-
scribed in many places, including Malcolm Gladwell, Outliers: 
The Story of Success (New York: Little, Brown, 2008). For 
accessible introductions to the work by Ericsson, see K. A. Er-
icsson & P. Ward, Capturing the naturally occurring superior 
per for mance of experts in the laboratory: Toward a science of 
expert and exceptional per for mance, Current Directions in 
Psychological Science 16 (2007), 346– 350.
 21. Mental imagery and its power as an aid to learning and mem-
ory has been appreciated since the time of the ancient Greeks. 
However, psychologists only began studying the topic in ex-
perimental studies in the 1960s. Allan Paivio’s research showed 
the power of imagery in controlled studies. A summary of his 

Notes to Pages 188–193 
ê 282
early research appears in A. Paivio, Imagery and Verbal 
 Pro cesses (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1971).
 22. Mark Twain, “How to Make History Dates Stick,” Harper’s, 
December 1914, available at  www .twainquotes .com /History 
Dates /HistoryDates .html, accessed October 30, 2013.
 23. In the history of mnemonic devices (and psychologists’ and 
educators’ attitudes toward them), they have suffered various 
reversals of fortune over the centuries. They  were valued from 
Greek and Roman times and throughout the Middle Ages by 
educated people who needed to remember large amounts of 
information (e.g., to make a two- hour speech in the Roman 
Senate). In recent years, educators have dismissed them as 
useful merely for rote learning. However, as we show in this 
chapter, this charge is not fair. Mnemonics, as used by James 
Paterson and his students, can serve (as they did for the an-
cient Greeks and Romans) as or ga niz ing systems for retrieving 
information. To put it simply, mnemonic devices are not neces-
sarily good for comprehending complex information, but us-
ing a mnemonic system to help to retrieve learned informa-
tion can be invaluable. James Worthy and Reed Hunt provide 
an excellent introduction to the history of and psychological 
research on mnemonic devices in their book Mnemonology: 
Mnemonics for the 21st Century (New York: Psychology 
Press, 2011).
 24. James Paterson is a “memory athlete,” partaking in a growing 
sport in Eu rope, China, and to some extent the United States. 
Joshua Foer wrote about this emerging subculture in his best-
selling book Moonwalking with Einstein: The Art and Science 
of Remembering Everything (New York: Penguin, 2011). How 
long might it take a person to remember a shuffl ed deck of 
cards in order? For you, a long time. For a memory athlete in 
the top rungs, under two minutes. A video of Simon Reinhard 
memorizing a deck of cards in 21.9 seconds is available at 
 www .youtube .com /watch ?v=sbinQ6GdOVk, accessed Octo-
ber 30, 2013. This was a world record at the time, but Rein-
hard has since broken it (21.1 seconds is the record as of this 
writing). Reinhard has broken twenty seconds in practice ses-
sions but not yet in a timed public event (Simon Reinhard, 

Notes to Pages 194–236 
ê 283
personal communication in the form of a conversation over 
dinner in St. Louis, MO, on May 8, 2013, with Roddy Roedi-
ger and several other people).
 25. Michela Seong- Hyun Kim’s description of her experience us-
ing mnemonics was relayed to Peter Brown by James Paterson 
in private correspondence, February 8, 2013.
 26. Peter Brown and Roddy Roediger interview of James Pater-
son, January 4, 2013, St. Louis, MO.
 27. Peter Brown interview of Karen Kim, April 18, 2013, St. 
Paul, MN.
 8. Make It Stick
 1. Peter Brown telephone interview of Michael Young, May 21, 
2013. All quotes of Young are from this interview.
 2. Peter Brown telephone interview of Stephen Madigan, May 
20, 2013.
 3. Peter Brown interview of Nathaniel Fuller, April 29, 2013, 
Minneapolis, MN.
 4. John McPhee, “Draft no. 4,” New Yorker, April 29, 2013, 
32– 38.
 5. Peter Brown interview of Thelma Hunter, April 30, 2013, St. 
Paul, MN.
 6. Peter Brown interview of Mary Pat Wenderoth, May 7, 
2013, Seattle, WA.
 7. The empirical studies aimed at testing the effects of high- 
structure classes in reducing student attrition in gateway science 
classes are S. Freeman, D. Haak, & M. P. Wenderoth, Increased 
course structure improves per for mance in introductory biol-
ogy, CBE Life Sciences Education 10 (Summer 2011), 175– 
186; also S. Freeman, E. O’Connor, J. W. Parks, D. H. Cunning-
ham, D. Haak, C. Dirks, & M. P. Wenderoth, Prescribed active 
learning increases per for mance in introductory biology, CBE 
Life Sciences Education 6 (Summer 2007), 132– 139.
 8. Peter Brown telephone interview of Michael Matthews, May 
2, 2013.
 9. Peter Brown telephone interview of Kiley Hunkler, May 21, 
2013.

Notes to Pages 237–251 
ê 284
 10. Peter Brown interview of Kathleen McDermott, June 20, 
2013, Folly Beach, SC.
 11. Peter Brown telephone interview of Kathy Maixner, July 18, 
2013.
 12. Peter Brown telephone interview of Kenneth Barber, July 1, 
2013.
 13. Peter Brown telephone interview of Richard Wynveen, July 
17, 2013.
 14. Peter Brown telephone interview of Erik Isaacman, June 2, 
2013.

285
Following are some readings to provide underpinnings for and 
to further illustrate the principles we have described in this 
book. These readings are just the tip of the iceberg; in the scien-
tifi c literature there are hundreds of papers addressing these 
techniques. In the notes section, we provide references for stud-
ies and quotes that are included in the text so that readers 
may delve deeper. We have tried to balance the need for more 
information without affl icting the reader with paralyzing detail 
about the studies.
Scholarly Articles
Crouch, C. H., Fagen, A. P., Callan, J. P., & Mazur, E. (2004). 
Classroom demonstrations: Learning tools or entertain-
ment? American Journal of Physics, 72, 835– 838. An inter-
esting use of generation to enhance learning from classroom 
demonstrations.
Suggested Reading

Suggested Reading 
ê 286
Dunlosky, J., Rawson, K. A., Marsh, E. J., Nathan, M. J., & Willing-
ham, D. T. (2013). Improving students’ learning with effective 
learning techniques: Promising directions from cognitive and 
educational psychology. Psychological Science in the Public 
Interest 14, 4– 58. Describes techniques that research has 
shown to work in improving educational practice in both 
laboratory and fi eld (educational) settings, as well as other 
techniques that do not work. Provides a thorough discussion 
of the research literature supporting (or not) each technique.
McDaniel, M. A. (2012). Put the SPRINT in knowledge training: 
Training with SPacing, Retrieval, and INTerleaving. In A. F. 
Healy & L. E. Bourne Jr. (eds.), Training Cognition: Optimiz-
ing Effi ciency, Durability, and Generalizability (pp. 267– 286). 
New York: Psychology Press. This chapter points out that 
many training situations, from business to medicine to continu-
ing education, tend to cram training into an intensive several 
day “course.” Evidence that spacing and interleaving would be 
more effective for promoting learning and retention is summa-
rized and some ideas are provided for how to incorporate these 
techniques into training.
McDaniel, M. A., & Donnelly, C. M. (1996). Learning with analogy 
and elaborative interrogation. Journal of Educational Psychol-
ogy 88, 508– 519. These experiments illustrate the use of several 
elaborative techniques for learning technical material, includ-
ing visual imagery and self- questioning techniques. This article 
is more technical than the others in this list.
Richland, L. E., Linn, M. C., & Bjork, R. A. (2007). Instruction. In 
F. Durso, R. Nickerson, S. Dumais, S. Lewandowsky, & T. Per-
fect (eds.), Handbook of Applied Cognition (2nd ed., pp. 553– 
583). Chichester: Wiley. Provides examples of how desirable 
diffi culties, including generation, might be implemented in in-
structional settings.
Roediger, H. L., Smith, M. A., & Putnam, A. L. (2011). Ten benefi ts 
of testing and their applications to educational practice. In B. 
H. Ross (ed.), Psychology of Learning and Motivation. San 
Diego: Elsevier Academic Press. Provides a summary of the 
host of potential benefi ts of practicing retrieving as a learning 
technique.

Suggested Reading 
ê 287
Books
Brooks, D. The Social Animal: The Hidden Sources Love, Character, 
and Achievement. New York: Random  House, 2011.
Coyle, D. The Talent Code: Greatness Isn’t Born. It’s Grown.  Here’s 
How. New York: Bantam Dell, 2009.
Doidge, N. The Brain the Changes Itself: Stories of Personal Triumph 
from the Frontiers of Brain Science. New York: Penguin Books, 
2007.
Duhigg, C. The Power of Habit: Why We Do What We Do in Life and 
Business. New York: Random  House, 2012.
Dunlosky, J., & Metcalfe, J. Metacognition. Los Angeles: Sage Publi-
cations, 2009.
Dunning, D. Self- Insight: Roadblocks and Detours on the Path to 
Knowing Thyself (Essays in Social Psychology). New York: 
Psychology Press, 2005.
Dweck, C. S. Mindset: The New Psychology of Success. New York: 
Ballantine Books, 2008.
Foer, J. Moonwalking with Einstein: The Art and Science of Remem-
bering Everything. New York: Penguin, 2011.
Gilovich, T. How We Know What Isn’t So: The Fallibility of Human 
Reason in Everyday Life. New York: Free Press, 1991.
Gladwell, M. Blink: The Power of Thinking Without Thinking. New 
York: Little, Brown & Co., 2005.
––––. Outliers: The Story of Success. New York: Little Brown & Co, 
2008.
Healy, A. F. & Bourne, L. E., Jr. (Eds.). Training Cognition: Optimizing 
Effi ciency, Durability, and Generalizability. New York: Psychol-
ogy Press, 2012.
Kahneman, D. Thinking Fast and Slow. New York: Farrar, Straus 
and Giroux, 2011.
Mayer, R. E. Applying the Science of Learning. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Pearson, 2010.
Nisbett, R. E. Intelligence and How to Get It. New York: W. W. 
Norton & Company, 2009.
Sternberg, R. J., & Grigorenko, E. L. Dynamic Testing: The Nature 
and Mea sure ment of Learning Potential. Cambridge: Univer-
sity of Cambridge, 2002.

Suggested Reading 
ê 288
Tough, P. How Children Succeed: Grit, Curiosity, and the Hidden 
Power of Character. Boston: Houghton Miffl in Harcourt, 2012.
Willingham, D. T. When Can You Trust the Experts: How to Tell 
Good Science from Bad in Education. San Francisco: Jossey- 
Bass, 2012.
Worthen, J. B., & Hunt, R. R. Mnemonology: Mnemonics for the 
21st Century (Essays in Cognitive Psychology). New York: 
Psychology Press, 2011.

289
Writing this book was truly a joint enterprise. The authors 
collaborated over a three year period in a most productive 
way. Many people and organizations contributed helpful sup-
port and insights.
We acknowledge the James S. McDonnell Foundation of 
St. Louis, Missouri, for their grant “Applying Cognitive Psy-
chology to Enhance Educational Practice” awarded to Henry 
Roediger and Mark McDaniel, with Henry Roediger as the 
principal investigator. This grant supported eleven researchers 
who collaborated for ten years on research to translate cogni-
tive science into educational science. Many points in our book 
come from the research the McDonnell Foundation supported. 
We thank the other nine members of our group, from whom 
we have learned much: Robert and Elizabeth Bjork of the 
University of California at Los Angeles, John Dunlosky and 
Katherine Rawson at Kent State University, Larry Jacoby of 
Ac know ledg ments

Ac know ledg ments 
ê 290
Washington University, Elizabeth Marsh of Duke University, 
Kathleen McDermott of Washington University, Janet Met-
calfe at Columbia University, and Hal Pashler at the Univer-
sity of California at San Diego. We particularly thank John 
Bruer, president of the McDonnell Foundation, and Susan 
Fitzpatrick, vice president, for their guidance and support, as 
well as the James S. McDonnell family.
We would also like to thank the Cognition and Student 
Learning Program of the Institute for Education Sciences (U.S. 
Department of Education) for a series of grants that have 
aided research by Roediger and McDaniel in school settings, 
in collaboration with Kathleen McDermott. The work we con-
ducted in Illinois at Columbia Middle School and Columbia 
High School would not have been possible without this sup-
port. We thank our program offi cers at CASL, Elizabeth Albro, 
Carol O’Donnell, and Erin Higgins. In addition, we thank 
teachers, principals, and students at the Columbia Schools, in 
par tic u lar, Roger Chamberlain (principal at Columbia Middle 
School when we began our research there) and Patrice Bain, 
the fi rst teacher who pioneered implementation of our research 
in a classroom. Other teachers who permitted us to conduct 
experiments in their classrooms include Teresa Fehrenz, 
 Andria Matzenbacher, Michelle Spivey, Ammie Koch, Kelly 
Landgraf, Carleigh Ottwell, Cindy McMullan, Missie Steve, 
Neal O’Donnell and Linda Malone. A great group of research 
assistants has helped with this research, including Kristy Du-
prey, Lindsay Brockmeier, Barbie Huelser, Lisa Cressey, Marco 
Chacon, Anna Dinndorf, Laura D’Antonio, Jessye Brick, Alli-
son Obenhaus, Meghan McDoniel, and Aaron Theby. Pooja 
Agarwal has been instrumental in this project every step of 
the way, leading the research on a day- to- day basis while she 
was a graduate student at Washington University and then 

Ac know ledg ments 
ê 291
overseeing the project as a postdoctoral fellow. Many of the 
practical suggestions in the book came from our classroom 
experiments.
Dart NeuroScience of San Diego, California, supported 
our research on memory athletes through a generous grant. 
Roediger served as principal investigator and was joined 
by David Balota, Kathleen McDermott, and Mary Pyc. We 
tested several memory athletes in this project, and we appre-
ciate James Paterson for letting us use his story in the book. 
We are especially grateful for the support of Tim Tully, Dart’s 
chief scientifi c offi cer, who fi rst approached us with the idea 
of identifying individuals with highly superior memory 
abilities.
Our granting agencies  were generous in their support, but 
we provide the usual disclaimer that the opinions expressed 
in this book are those of the authors and do not represent the 
views of the James S. McDonnell Foundation, the Institute of 
Education Sciences, the U.S. Department of Education, or Dart 
NeuroScience.
Roediger and McDaniel would like to thank the many stu-
dents and postdoctoral fellows who worked with us and 
helped with the projects described in this book. Graduate stu-
dents who worked with Roediger on relevant projects during 
this period are Pooja Agarwal, Andrew Butler, Andy DeSoto, 
Michael Goode, Jeff Karpicke, Adam Putnam, Megan Smith, 
Victor Sungkhasettee, and Franklin Zaromb. Postdoctoral fel-
lows included Pooja Agarwal, Jason Finley, Bridgid Finn, Lisa 
Geraci, Keith Lyle, David McCabe, Mary Pyc, and Yana 
Weinstein. Research staff that worked on the project include 
Jane McConnell, Jean Ortmann- Sotomayor, Brittany Butler, 
and Julie Gray. Mark McDaniel would like to thank his stu-
dents who worked on research pertinent to this book: Aimee 

Ac know ledg ments 
ê 292
Calendar, Cynthia Fadler, Dan Howard, Khuyen Nguyen, 
Mathew Robbins, and Kathy Wildman, and his research- 
assistant staff, Michael Cahill, Mary Derbish, Yiyi Liu, and 
Amanda Meyer. His postdoctoral fellows who worked on re-
lated projects  were Jeri Little, Keith Lyle, Anaya Thomas, and 
Ruthann Thomas.
We are indebted to those individuals from many walks of 
life who shared their stories of learning and remembering to 
help us illustrate the important ideas in this book. We thank 
Ken Barber at Jiffy Lube International, Bonnie Blodgett, Mia 
Blundetto, Derwin Brown, Matt Brown, Patrick Castillo, Vince 
Dooley, Mike Ebersold, Nathaniel Fuller, Catherine Johnson, 
Sarah Flanagan, Bob Fletcher, Alex Ford, Steve Ford, David 
Garman, Jean Germain, Lucy Gerold, Bruce Hendry, Michael 
Hoffman, Peter Howard, Kiley Hunkler, Thelma Hunter, Erik 
Isaacman, Karen Kim, Young Nam Kim, Nancy Lageson, 
Douglas Larsen, Stephen Madigan, Kathy Maixner, Michael 
Matthews, Kathleen McDermott, Michael McMurchie and 
Rick Wynveen at Renewal by Andersen, Jeff Moseley, James 
Paterson and his students at Bellerbys College (Stephanie Ong, 
Victoria Gevorkova, and Michela Seong- Hyun Kim), Bill 
Sands, Andy Sobel, Annette Thompson and Dave Nystrom at 
Farmers Insurance, Jon Wehrenberg, Mary Pat Wenderoth, 
and Michael Young. We thank Lorri Freifeld at Training mag-
azine for introducing us to the leaders of exemplary corporate 
training programs.
Several people kindly read earlier drafts of the book or se-
lected chapters. We thank Ellen Brown, Kathleen McDermott, 
Henry Moyers, Thomas Moyers, and Steve Nelson. As is 
customary in the sciences, fi ve of our peers from the scientifi c 
community  were recruited by our publisher to review the book 
anonymously in manuscript: we thank the three who have 
subsequently identifi ed themselves– Bob Bjork, Dan Schacter, 

Ac know ledg ments 
ê 293
and Dan Willingham– and the two whose identities remain 
unknown to us.
Finally, we thank Elizabeth Knoll, our editor, and the pro-
fessional staff at Harvard University Press for their insights, 
guidance, and devotion to the quality of this book.


Accessible information, 
compared to available 
information, 268n8
Achievement: attributions on, 
180– 182; in science courses, 
class structure affecting, 
232– 234, 283n7
Achievement gap in the sciences, 
on closing, 232– 234, 283n7
Acquired skill, learning as, 2
Agarwal, Pooja, 34
Alzheimer’s disease, 164
Ambiguity, hunger for narrative 
in, 109– 112
Anagram solving: diffi culty 
and working memory in, 
91– 92, 270n17; distraction 
of one- sided conversation 
affecting, 109– 110; varied 
practice in, 52– 53, 264– 265n6
Analogical transfer, 278n14
Analytical skills: and achievement 
in science courses, 233; in 
Bloom’s taxonomy of learning, 
228; and intelligence, 148, 150
Andersen Windows and Doors, 
247– 250
Anxiety in test taking, 91– 92
Application of learning, in 
Bloom’s taxonomy of 
learning, 228
Apprentice model in training, 127
Aristotle, 28
Artists, learning painting styles 
of, 53– 54, 84, 265n7
Associative learning, 172
Index
295

Index 
ê 296
Attitude: brain training affecting, 
178; growth mindset in, 
179– 183, 233, 281n16
Attributions of achievement and 
failure, 180– 182
Auditory learning style, 143, 
144, 145
Available information, compared 
to accessible information, 
268n8
Axons, 166, 169– 170; myelina-
tion of, 169, 170– 171, 178
Azimuth check, 21, 235– 236
Bach- y-Rita, Paul, 168– 169
Bacon, Francis, 28, 131, 
274n1
Bain, Patrice, 33, 36
Barber, Ken, 246, 247, 284n12
Barnet, Ann, 173
Barnet, Richard, 173
Baseball training, 6– 7, 79– 81, 
85, 86, 206, 268n9
Batting practice, 6– 7, 79– 81, 
85, 86, 206
Beanbag study of motor skills 
learning, 46, 51, 86, 263n1
Bellerbys College, 193, 211
Bias in hindsight, 115– 116, 
273n11
Big lie technique, 116
Bird classifi cation, learning of, 
54– 55, 84– 85
Bjork, Elizabeth, 69, 98, 266n12, 
266– 267n2, 268n10, 270n19
Bjork, Robert, 69, 98, 111, 145, 
266n12, 266– 267n2, 267n6, 
268n10, 270n19
Blindness, sensory retraining in, 
168, 169
Blink (Gladwell), 106
Blocked practice, 53, 65, 206, 
207
Blodgett, Bonnie, 94– 98, 209, 
270n18
Bloom, Benjamin, 228
Bloom’s taxonomy of learning, 
228– 229, 232, 233
Blundetto, Frank, 68
Blundetto, Mia, 67– 68, 71– 72, 
266n1
Braille, 168
Brain: changes in learning, 7, 
199, 226; consolidation of 
memory in, 20, 28, 49, 100, 
172; encoding of information 
in, 72– 73, 100, 267n3; frontal 
lobes of, 170– 171; in habit 
formation, 171– 172; in motor 
learning, 51– 52, 264n5; 
myelination of nerve fi bers in, 
169, 170– 171, 178; neuro-
genesis in, 172; plasticity of, 
66, 142, 164– 173, 184, 279n3; 
remodeling in deliberate 
practice, 184; training of, 
176– 179
The Brain That Changes Itself 
(Doidge), 168
Branson, Richard, 139, 140
Brazilian children with street 
businesses, mathematical 
abilities of, 149– 150, 276n10
Brooklyn Free School, 123
Brown, Matt, 1– 2, 10– 12, 19, 
20, 197

Index 
ê 297
Bruer, John T., 166, 167, 175
Business training methods, 50, 
240– 252
Calibration of judgments of 
learning, 4– 5, 125– 130, 
210– 211; retrieval practice 
and testing in, 125, 
202– 203
California Polytechnic State 
University, baseball training 
in, 79– 81, 86
Carnahan, Mel, 108, 271n3
Carson, Kit, 165, 167, 
279n2
Chamberlain, Roger, 33, 36– 37, 
44– 45, 261n9
China Airlines incident, 
106– 109, 271n3
Chugani, Harry T., 168
Chunking pro cess in habit 
formation, 171, 198
Classical conditioning, 199
Climb for Memory Foundation, 
164
Coaching methods. See Sports 
training
Cognitive differences in 
learning: for rule learners 
and example learners, 
155– 157, 278– 279n15; 
and structure building, 
153– 155
Cognitive psychology, 8
Columbia Public School 
District (Illinois), 238– 239; 
test- enhanced learning in, 20, 
33– 37, 258n13, 260n8
Columbus State University, 
212– 213
Common Core State Standards 
Initiative, 238
Competence, overestimation 
of, 104– 105, 121– 123, 124, 
273n17
Comprehension: Bloom’s 
taxonomy of learning on, 
228; cues for judgment of, 
126
Conceptual knowledge, 55, 
84– 85, 265n8; compared to 
factual knowledge, 55
Conditioning, classical, 199
Conformity of memory, social 
infl uences on, 117
Connectome, 170
Consolidation of memory, 28, 
49, 63, 73– 75, 100, 267n4; 
neurogenesis in, 172; and 
reconsolidation, 20, 74, 
82– 83, 101, 268– 269n11; 
in sleep, 63, 73, 267n4
Contagion of memory by social 
infl uences, 117, 273n12
Contemporary Educational 
Psychology, 14
Context of learning, 6; concrete 
and personal, 11
Control, sense of, in growth 
mindset, 179– 183
Cramming, 3, 31, 44, 48, 63, 
203, 226
Creative intelligence, 148, 150
Creativity, 17– 18, 30
Crystallized intelligence, 147, 
176

Index 
ê 298
Culture of continuous improve-
ment in Andersen Windows 
and Doors, 247– 250
Cumulative learning: fostered 
by cumulative quizzing, 
38– 39; 238; in Columbia 
Public School District, 
238– 239; as teaching strategy, 
227; testing on, 238
Curse of knowledge, 115– 116, 
119, 273n11, 273n16
Dartmouth College, 12, 257n5
Darwin Awards, 104
Delay of gratifi cation, 162– 163, 
279n1
Deliberate practice, 183– 185, 
281n20
Dellis, Nelson, 164, 166
Dendrites, 166, 169– 170
Desirable diffi culties in learning, 
68– 69, 98, 160, 226– 228, 
229, 266– 267n2
Developmental psychology, 8
Diffi culty of learning, 7, 
67– 101; as desirable, 68– 69, 
98, 160, 226– 228, 229, 
266– 267n2; in jump school 
training, 68– 78; in spaced 
practice, 4, 47, 49, 81, 82, 
205; and strength and 
duration of memory, 9; for 
students, 201; as teaching 
strategy, 225– 228, 229; as 
undesirable, 92, 98– 99
Discrimination skills, 65, 101; 
in identifi cation of artists’ 
painting styles, 53– 54, 84, 
265n7; in identifi cation of 
birds, 54– 55, 84– 85; fostered 
by interleaved and varied 
practice , 53– 55, 65, 84– 85, 
101
Disraeli, Benjamin, 109
Distortions of memory, 109– 118; 
in false consensus effect, 117, 
273n13; in familiarity, 116; in 
fl ashbulb memories, 117– 118, 
273n14; in hindsight bias, 
115– 116, 273n11; in hunger 
for narratives, 109– 112; in 
hypnosis, 114, 272n9; in 
imagination infl ation, 113, 
272n7; in interference, 
114– 115; in social infl uences, 
116– 117; in suggestion, 
113– 114
Doidge, Norman, 168
Donahue, Barney, 136– 137
Dooley, Vince, 60– 62, 120, 198, 
222, 266n11
Dowling, Joe, 217
Dreaming, consolidation of 
memory in, 267n4
Dunn, Kenneth, 144
Dunn, Rita, 144
Dunning, David, 109, 121, 122, 
126, 273n17
Dunning- Kruger effect, 121, 
273n17
Dweck, Carol, 92, 139, 
179– 183, 233, 281n16
Dynamic testing, 151– 152, 159, 
277n12; steps in, 152
Dyslexia, 139– 140, 141– 143, 
159, 275nn3– 4

Index 
ê 299
Early education programs, 
intelligence quotient changes 
in, 175– 176
Ebersold, Mike, 23– 27, 29, 59, 
120, 127, 155, 198, 222, 
259n1
Edison, Thomas, 93
Effort: advanced learning in, 7; 
brain changes in, 199, 226; 
conceptual learning in, 84– 85; 
and desirable diffi culties in 
learning, 68– 69, 98, 160, 
226– 228, 229, 266– 267n2; 
failure attributions affecting, 
180– 182; and generation 
effect, 32; in growth mindset, 
179, 180– 181; in interleaved 
practice, 47, 50, 81, 207; 
mastery in, 83– 84; mental 
models in, 83, 101; in 
per for mance goals and 
learning goals, 180– 181; 
praise affecting, 181– 182; 
reconsolidation of memory in, 
82– 83; in retrieval practice, 
41, 43, 79, 203, 262n14; in 
spaced practice, 4, 47, 49, 81, 
82, 205; and strength and 
duration of memory, 9, 49; in 
student learning, 201; teacher 
explanations of, 225– 226; in 
varied practice, 47, 81
Einstein, Albert, 17
Elaboration pro cess, 5– 6, 
36, 207– 208; in Andersen 
Windows and Doors, 250; 
in football training, 62; of 
lifelong learners, 219, 
223– 225; of medical student, 
214, 215; in refl ection, 
209– 210; with summary 
sheets, 208, 231; as teaching 
strategy, 208, 227, 231
Embedded questions, benefi ts of 
to low structure- builders, 
155, 277n13
Empirical research on learning, 9
Encoding pro cess, 72– 73, 100, 
267n3
Environmental infl uences on 
intelligence quotient, 173– 176
Ericsson, Anders, 92– 93, 183, 
184– 185, 195, 224, 281n20
Erie Lackawanna railroad, 
137– 138
Errorless learning, 90, 270n16; 
myth of, 90– 94
Errors, 90– 94; of blundering 
gardener, 94– 98; feedback 
on, 39– 40, 44, 90, 101; 
and Festival of Errors, 93; 
generative learning in, 94– 98; 
in illusion of knowing, 
102– 130; and intellectual 
abilities, 7, 92; in retrieval 
practice, 202; in social 
contagion of memory, 117
Evaluation skills, in Bloom’s 
taxonomy of learning, 
229
Example learning, 160; 
compared to rule learning, 
155– 157, 278– 279n15
Experience, learning from, 66, 
133; generation effect in, 
208– 209; on investment 

Index 
ê 300
Experience (continued)
 strategies, 132– 139, 152; in 
medical education, 58– 59
Expert per for mance, 92– 93; 
deliberate practice for, 
183– 185; mental models in, 
83; self- discipline, grit, and 
per sis tence required for, 182, 
183, 199
Explicit memory, 56
Failure: attributions of, 180– 182; 
and errorless learning, 90– 94; 
fear of, 91– 92; as source of 
inspiration, 93
False consensus effect, 117, 
273n13
False memories, 267n3
Familiarity: continuing practice 
in, 64; feeling of knowing in, 
116; judgment of learning in, 
126
Farmers Insurance training 
program, 50, 241– 244
Far Side cartoons, 5
Feedback, 261n12; in Andersen 
Windows and Doors training, 
248; delayed and immediate, 
comparison of, 39– 40; on 
errors, 39– 40, 44, 90, 101; 
in Jiffy Lube University, 245, 
246; judgment of learning 
based on, 122, 126– 127; lack 
of, overestimation of compe-
tence in, 122; in motor 
learning, 40, 261n12
Fellows, Timothy, 216– 217
Festival of Errors, 93
Firearms training, simulations 
in, 128– 130
Fire extinguisher location test, 
13, 258n7
Fire hose method of instruction, 
10, 12
First RepublicBank of Texas, 
138
Flashbulb memories, 117– 118, 
273n14
Flashcards: in retrieval practice, 
3, 204; in spaced practice, 
64, 204; in student- directed 
learning, 44, 124, 274n19; 
in varied practice, 65– 66
Fleming, Neil, 144
Flight simulator training, 11– 12
Fluency: illusion of mastery in, 
17, 82, 116, 202, 210; 
judgment of learning in, 126; 
in language, 141
Fluid intelligence, 146– 147, 
176– 178
Flynn, James, 280n11
Flynn effect, 173, 280n11
Foer, Joshua, 194– 195
Football coaching and training, 
60– 62, 120, 124, 198; 
refl ection in, 62, 222
Forgetting, 267n3; as aid 
in new learning, 77– 78, 
267– 268nn6–7; curve of, 
28, 259n2; in massed 
practice, 47, 48; in medical 
education, 59– 60; in reassign-
ment or disuse of retrieval 
cues, 77– 79; of short- term 
memory, 72– 73, 100; in 

Index 
ê 301
spaced practice, 63, 82; 
testing affecting, 30– 32, 39, 
259– 260n6
Fortune magazine, 139, 142
Fremont, John, 165, 167
Frontal lobes, 170– 171
Fuller, Nathaniel, 217– 220, 239, 
283n3
Gardening, generative learning 
about, 94– 98, 209
Gardner, Howard, 147– 148, 
275n8
Garman, David, 103, 222, 271n2
Geiger, Gadi, 142
Generation effect, 32, 87– 88, 
94– 98, 208– 209, 260n7, 
269n14; in Andersen Win-
dows and Doors, 250; for 
blundering gardener, 94– 98, 
209; for lifelong learners, 
220– 222; as teaching strategy, 
227
Ge ne tic infl uences, 7, 163, 165; 
on brain structure, 165, 168, 
170; on intellectual abilities, 
92, 173, 174, 178
George Mason University, 12, 
257n4
Georgia Regents University, 
211, 213
Gladwell, Malcolm, 106
Goals: in deliberate practice, 
183; on per for mance and 
learning, comparison of, 
180– 181
Goldman- Rakic, Patricia, 167, 
279n3
Gratifi cation, delay of, 162– 163, 
279n1
Gray matter, 169– 170
Grigorenko, Elena, 151, 277n12
Growth mindset, 179– 183, 
281n16; and achievement in 
science courses, 233
Habit formation, chunking 
pro cess in, 171– 172
Habit strength, 65; compared 
to momentary strength, 63, 
266n12
Handicapping of  horse races, 
mathematics and IQ in, 150, 
276– 277n11
Harris, Carol, 113, 272n6
Hendry, Bruce, 131, 132– 139, 
152, 158, 160, 275n2
Hendry, Doris, 132
Highest Duty (Sullenberger), 
223
Hindsight bias, 115– 116, 
273n11
Hippocampus, 172
Hockey training, 52, 65
Honey and Mumford Learning 
Styles Questionnaire, 144
Horse race handicapping, 
mathematics and IQ in, 150, 
276– 277n11
How Children Succeed (Tough), 
182
Human Connectome Project, 170
Hunkler, Kiley, 21, 235– 236, 
283n9
Hunter, Thelma, 223– 225, 
283n5

Index 
ê 302
Hypnosis, memory distortion in, 
114, 272n9
Ice hockey training, 52, 65
Illusion of knowing, 15– 17, 21, 
81, 102– 130, 210, 258n11, 
274n23; automatic System 1 
and controlled System 2 in, 
105– 109; in brain training 
exercises, 178; distortion of 
memory in, 109– 118; in 
fl uency, 17, 82, 116, 202, 
210; in massed practice, 82; 
in rereading, 15– 16, 17, 116; 
teaching strategies in, 229, 
230; testing in, 4– 5, 16, 17, 
116, 210
Imagery as memory cues, 
186– 188, 193– 194, 195– 196, 
211, 224, 281– 282n21
Imagination infl ation, distortion 
of memory in, 113, 272n7
Implicit memory, 56
Indigenous knowledge, compared 
to academic knowledge, 
148– 149
Induction abilities, 101
Inner Gate Acu punc ture, 240, 
250– 252
In- service training, 239– 240
Instructional styles, 145– 146, 
275n6. See also Teaching 
methods
Intellectual abilities, 7, 165, 
173– 183; control of, 7, 92; 
environmental factors 
affecting, 173– 176; and fear 
of failure, 92; ge ne tic 
infl uences on, 92, 173, 174, 
178; growth mindset on, 
179– 183; as hardwired, 7, 
165, 166, 226
Intelligence, 146– 150, 159, 
275nn7– 8; brain training 
exercises affecting, 176– 179; 
crystallized, 147, 176; fl uid, 
146– 147, 176– 178; mea sure-
ment of, 147, 148– 149; 
multiple types of, 147– 148, 
275n8; Sternberg model on, 
148– 150
Intelligence and How to Get 
It (Nisbett), 173, 280n12
Intelligence quotient, 147, 165, 
173– 176; environmental 
factors affecting, 173– 176; 
Flynn effect in, 173, 280n11; 
and  horse race handicapping 
ability, 150, 276– 277n11
Interference, 114– 115; learning 
benefi ts of, 86– 87, 269n13
Interleaved practice, 4, 49– 50, 
64– 65, 66, 205– 207, 269n12; 
on bird identifi cation, 55, 
84– 85; conceptual learning 
in, 84– 85; consolidation of 
memory in, 75; of discrimina-
tion skills, 53– 55, 65, 84– 85, 
101; effort in, 47, 50, 81, 
207; in Farmers Insurance, 
50, 242– 244; of football 
team, 61, 62; habit strength 
in, 63, 65; of lifelong learners, 
219, 220; massed practice 
compared to, 47, 49, 50, 
53– 55, 206– 207, 263– 264n2; 

Index 
ê 303
mastery in, 83, 84; on 
mathematics problems, 
49– 50, 264n4; in medical 
education, 58; in military 
jump school training, 71; 
on motor skills, 65, 80, 206; 
on painting style of artists, 
53– 54, 84, 265n7; in pi lot 
training, 12; for spacing 
retrieval practice, 204; as 
study strategy, 205– 207; as 
teaching strategy, 228
Interpersonal intelligence, 147
Intrapersonal intelligence, 147
Investment strategies, learning 
about, 132– 139, 152, 158
Isaacman, Erik, 250– 252, 284n14
Jacoby, Larry, 111
James, William, 28
Jiffy Lube University, 245– 247
Jobs, Steve, 93– 94
Johnson, Catherine, 128– 129
Judgments of learning, 3, 4– 5, 
125– 130, 159; calibration of, 
4– 5, 125– 130, 210– 211; cues 
in, 126; feedback in, 126– 127; 
illusion of knowing in (See 
Illusion of knowing); overesti-
mation of competence in, 
104– 105, 121– 123, 124, 
273n17; in peer instruction, 
125– 126; in student- directed 
learning, 124; testing affect-
ing, 4– 5, 16, 17, 125, 202– 203
Jump school training in military, 
67– 78; smoke jump training 
after, 78
Kahneman, Daniel, 105, 108, 123
Kaiser Steel, 138
Kaizen events, 248– 249
Keller, Helen, 112– 113, 272n6
Kelley, Colleen, 111
Kennedy, John F., 117
Kennedy, John F., Jr., 108, 271n3
Kenya, indigenous and academic 
knowledge of children in, 
148– 149
Kim, Karen, 197– 198
Kim, Michela Seong- Hyun, 
193– 194, 283n25
Kinesthetic intelligence, 147
Kinesthetic learning style, 
143, 144
Kinko’s, 140
Knew- it- all- along effect, 116
Knowledge: available and 
accessible information in, 
268n8; in Bloom’s taxonomy 
of learning, 228; conceptual, 
55, 84– 85, 265n8; and 
creativity, 17– 18, 30; curse 
of, 115– 116, 119, 273n11, 
273n16; illusion of (See 
Illusion of knowing); 
indigenous and academic, 
comparison of, 148– 149; and 
mastery, 18; and overestima-
tion of competence, 104– 105, 
121– 123, 124, 273n17; 
required for new learning, 5, 
100; retrieval cues of, 76– 79; 
System 1 and System 2 in, 
105– 109, 115
Kompon, Jamie, 52
Kruger, Justin, 121, 122, 273n17

Index 
ê 304
Language fl uency, 141
Larsen, Douglas, 56, 59, 60, 64, 
66, 155, 239, 265– 266n10
Larson, Gary, 5
LaRussa, Tony, 140– 141
Learning and Skills Research 
Centre, 143, 275n5
Learning goals, compared to 
per for mance goals, 180– 181
Learning paragraphs, 89, 210, 
232
Learning styles, 4, 94, 131– 132, 
139– 146, 275nn5– 6; dynamic 
testing compared to, 151; in 
dyslexia, 139– 140, 141– 143; 
and instructional styles, 
145– 146, 275n6; structure 
building compared to, 153; 
VARK approach to, 144
Learning theories, 8– 17
Learning tips: for students, 
201– 217; for lifelong 
learners, 217– 225
Leitner, Sebastian, 64
Leitner box, 64
Leonetti, Oliver, 250, 251, 252
Leppla, Sam, 135– 137
Lettvin, Jerome, 142
Lifelong learners, 2, 217– 225; 
elaboration by, 219, 223– 225; 
generation by, 220– 222; 
refl ection by, 222– 223; 
retrieval practice of, 217– 220
Linguistic intelligence, 147
Logical- mathematical intelli-
gence, 147
Long- term memory, 49, 73, 82, 
100; consolidation of, 73– 75
Madigan, Stephen, 216, 283n2
Maixner, Kathy, 240– 241, 251, 
284n11
Maixner Group, 240
Mallow, Johannes, 196
Manhattan Free School, 123
Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, 142
Massed practice, 3, 9– 10, 63; 
on bird identifi cation, 55; 
cramming as, 3, 31, 44, 48, 
63, 203, 226; fast gains in, 
9– 10, 47, 125; illusion of 
mastery in, 82; interleaved 
practice compared to, 47, 
49, 50, 53– 55, 206– 207, 
263– 264n2; of motor skills, 
52, 80, 81; myth of, 47– 48; 
on painting style of artists, 
53– 54, 265n7; retrieval 
practice compared to, 31, 
44, 203, 261n11; short- term 
memory in, 82; spaced 
practice compared to, 47, 
48, 49, 204– 205, 263– 
264n2; varied practice 
compared to, 47, 53– 55
Mastery, 159; components 
of, 18; deliberate practice 
for, 183– 185; in effort, 
83– 84; illusion of, 4– 5, 
15– 17 (See also Illusion 
of knowing); in medical 
education, 56– 60; mental 
models in, 118– 120
Mathematics: of Brazilian 
children with street busi-
nesses, 149– 150, 276n10; in 

Index 
ê 305
 horse race handicapping, 150, 
276– 277n11; interleaved 
practice on, 49– 50, 264n4; 
massed practice on, 53
Matthews, Michael D., 126, 
234– 236, 283n8
Mazur, Eric, 119, 125– 126, 
273n15
McCaw, Craig, 139– 140
McDaniel, Mark, 145
McDermott, Kathleen, 227, 
236– 238, 284n10
McPhee, John, 220– 222, 224, 
225
Medical education, 56– 60, 
211– 215; complex mastery in, 
56– 60; in- service training in, 
239; practical experience in, 
58– 59; refl ection in, 26– 27, 
59, 215, 222; retrieval practice 
in, 23– 27, 29, 57– 58, 60, 212, 
213– 215; spaced practice in, 
48– 49, 212, 214– 215, 264n3; 
testing in, 57, 60, 213, 214, 
265– 266n10
Memory, 2; in associative 
learning, 172; consolidation 
of (See Consolidation of 
memory); distortions of 
(See Distortions of memory); 
effort of learning affecting, 9, 
49; in elaboration, 207– 208; 
encoding of information in, 
72– 73, 100, 267n3; explicit, 
56; false, 267n3; false 
consensus effect on, 117, 
273n13; familiarity affecting, 
116; fl ashbulb, 117– 118, 
273n14; in fl uency, 116; and 
fl uid intelligence, 176– 178; 
and forgetting curves, 28, 
259n2; generation effect in, 
32, 87– 88, 269n14; hindsight 
bias affecting, 115– 116, 
273n11; hypnosis affecting, 
114, 272n9; imagination 
infl ation affecting, 113, 
272n7; implicit, 56; interfer-
ence affecting, 114– 115; 
long- term, 49, 73– 75, 82, 100; 
mental models in, 118– 120; 
with mnemonic devices, 
163– 164, 185– 198 (See also 
Mnemonic devices); momen-
tary and habit strength of, 63, 
266n12; narratives affecting, 
109– 112; in retrieval practice, 
3– 4, 19– 20, 75– 76; short- term, 
49, 72– 73, 75, 82, 90, 100; 
social infl uences on, 116– 117, 
273n12; in spaced practice, 
63, 82, 205; suggestion 
affecting, 113– 114; testing 
strengthening, 19– 20, 29, 
30– 32, 39, 259n5, 261n11; 
working (See Working 
memory)
Memory athletes, 164, 166, 
193, 194– 197, 282– 283n24
Memory cues, 185– 198. See 
also Mnemonic devices
Memory palaces, 185– 186, 
191– 194, 211
Memory span, 196
Memory traces, 72; consolida-
tion of, 73– 75

Index 
ê 306
Mental models, 6– 7, 83, 101, 
118– 120, 257n1; structure 
building in, 153
Mentors, 140
Metacognition, 16, 102, 121, 
169, 270– 271n1
Method of loci, 185– 186
Michelangelo, 184
Military jump school training, 
67– 78; smoke jump training 
after, 78
Mischel, Walter, 162, 279n1
Mnemonic devices, 163– 164, 
185– 198, 211; in Farmers 
Insurance training, 243, 244; 
historical, 189, 282n23; 
memory palaces as, 185– 186, 
191– 194, 211; mental 
imagery as, 186– 188, 
193– 194, 195– 196, 211, 224, 
281– 282n21; of psychology 
students, 163, 186, 191– 194, 
211; rhyme schemes as, 
188– 189; songs as, 189; 
visual imagery as, 187– 188, 
193– 194, 195– 196, 211, 
282n22
Momentary strength, compared 
to habit strength, 63, 266n12
Moonwalking with Einstein 
(Foer), 195
Morris, Errol, 109, 126
Motor skills, 40; beanbag study 
of, 46, 51, 86, 263n1; 
feedback on, 40, 261n12; in 
habit formation, 171– 172; 
interleaved practice of, 65, 
80, 206; massed practice of, 
52, 80, 81; varied practice 
of, 46, 51– 52, 264n5
Mozart, 184
Multiple- choice tests, 41, 
261n12, 262n14
Multiple intelligences, 147– 148, 
275n8
Musical intelligence, 147
Myelin, 169, 170– 171, 178, 
280n8
Narratives, 109– 113, 140
National Institutes of Health 
Human Connectome Project, 
170
Naturalistic intelligence, 148
Ner vous system: axons and 
dendrites in, 166, 169– 171, 
178; brain in (See Brain); in 
habit formation, 171– 172; 
myelination of, 169, 170– 171, 
178, 280n8; neurogenesis in, 
172; synapses in, 166– 167, 
170
Neurogenesis, 172
Neurons, 166; generation of, 
172; synapses of, 10, 
166– 167
Neuroplasticity, 66, 142, 
164– 173, 184, 279n3
Neuroscience, 8; plasticity of 
brain in, 164, 166– 173
New Yorker, 220
New York Times, 29, 109, 169
Nisbett, Richard, 173, 178, 
280n12
Nutrition, and intelligence 
quotient, 174– 175

Index 
ê 307
Open- book testing, 40, 
261– 262n13
Orfalea, Paul, 140
Osmosis social- learning 
platform, 240
Painting style of artists, inter-
leaved and massed practice in 
identifi cation of, 53– 54, 84, 
265n7
Paivio, Allan, 281– 282n21
Pashler, Harold, 145, 146
Paterson, James, 163– 164, 
166, 193– 197, 282– 283n24
Peer instruction, 125– 126; in 
testing groups, 230– 231
Peer review, 127
Penny memory test, 12– 13, 
258n7
Per for mance: attributions of, 
180– 182; in deliberate 
practice, 183– 185; expert 
(See Expert per for mance); 
goals on, compared to learning 
goals, 180– 181; in growth 
mindset, 179– 183; self- 
discipline, grit, and per sis tence 
required for, 182, 183, 199
Pi lot training, 1– 2, 10– 12, 19, 
169; and China Airlines 
incident, 106– 109, 271n3; 
refl ection in, 223; testing as 
retrieval practice in, 20
Plant classifi cation, learning of, 
96– 98
Plasticity of brain, 66, 142, 
164– 173, 279n3; in deliber-
ate practice, 184
Police training: refl ection in, 
222; simulations on fi rearm 
use in, 128– 130
Polk, James, 165, 167
Practical intelligence, 148, 150
Practice like you play. See 
Simulation training
Praise, and response to chal-
lenges, 181– 182
Priming the mind for learning, 
86. See also Generation effect
Prior knowledge as foundation 
for new learning, 5, 100
Problem solving, 4, 278n14; 
effort in, 86, 181– 182; errors 
in, 91– 92, 101; generation 
effect in, 87– 88, 94, 208– 209; 
interleaved practice in, 49– 50, 
264n4; mental models in, 120; 
praise affecting, 181– 182; by 
rule learners and example 
learners, 156– 157; transfer 
of learning in, 157, 278n14
Proust, Marcel, 79
Psychology students, 211; 
illusion of mastery of, 16; 
mnemonic devices used by, 
163, 186, 191– 194, 211; 
spaced retrieval practice of, 
216– 217; writing- to- learn 
strategy used by, 89– 90
Qstream training platform, 240
Quizzing. See Testing
Reading: ability in, 141; in 
dyslexia, 139– 140, 141– 143; 
generation effect in, 209;  

Index 
ê 308
Reading (continued)
 and intelligence quotient 
changes, 175– 176; interfer-
ence as learning aid in, 86– 87, 
269n13; and rereading (See 
Rereading); in VARK approach 
to learning styles, 144
Reagan, Ronald, 24
Recitation, compared to 
rereading, 30
Reconsolidation of memory, 20, 
74, 82– 83, 101, 268– 269n11
Refl ection, 26– 27, 66, 88– 90, 
209– 210; in football training, 
62, 222; of lifelong learners, 
222– 223; in medical educa-
tion, 26– 27, 59, 215, 222; in 
pi lot training, 223; in police 
training, 222; structure 
building in, 155; with 
write- to- learn and learning 
paragraphs, 89– 90, 210, 
232, 269n15
Refl exive actions: automatic 
System 1 in, 105– 106, 107, 
108, 115; neural circuits 
in, 171; repetitive practice 
required for, 25, 27
Rehearsal practice: of football 
team, 61– 62; as spaced 
practice, 76
Reinhard, Simon, 282– 283n24
Reloading learning, 82, 268n10
Remembrance of Things Past 
(Proust), 79
Renewal by Andersen, 247– 250
Repetition: in football practice, 
61; illusion of mastery in, 
15– 16; lack of learning in, 
12– 16, 258n7; in massed 
practice, 3, 9– 10; of reading 
(See Rereading); of retrieval 
practice, 28– 29, 31– 32, 43; 
study advice on, 12, 204– 205; 
of testing, 31– 32, 44, 125, 
203– 204, 263n17
Rereading, 3, 10, 14– 16, 
258nn9– 10; fl uency in, 17, 
116, 202; illusion of knowing 
in, 15– 16, 17, 116; of medical 
student, 214; recitation 
compared to, 30; retrieval 
practice and testing compared 
to, 41, 42, 44, 202– 203; 
spaced practice in, 14, 15
Retrieval cues, 75, 76– 79, 100, 
267n5; and accessible 
information, 268n8; and 
distortions of memory, 112
Retrieval practice, 3– 4, 11– 12, 
23– 45, 75– 76, 100; in 
Columbia Public School 
District, 34, 36, 238; in 
commercial training, 240; 
consolidation of memory in, 
74; effort in, 41, 43, 79, 203, 
262n14; of football team, 62; 
in free recall exercise, 231; 
with learning paragraphs, 
89, 232; of lifelong learners, 
217– 220; long- term benefi ts 
of, 35, 39, 44; massed 
practice compared to, 31, 44, 
203, 261n11; mastery in, 83; 
in medical education, 23– 27, 
29, 57– 58, 60, 212, 213– 215; 

Index 
ê 309
neurogenesis in, 172; of 
psychology student, 216– 217; 
refl ection in (See Refl ection); 
repetition of, 28– 29, 31– 32, 
43; rereading compared to, 
41, 42, 44, 202– 203; spaced 
out, 32, 43, 203– 205; in 
student- directed learning, 
124; as study technique, 41, 
201– 205, 262n15; as teaching 
strategy, 227, 229– 230, 231, 
235; testing as, 19– 20, 28– 44, 
201– 203. See also Testing
Retrieval strength, 266n12
Rhyme schemes as memory 
cues, 188– 189
Riverside Military Academy, 236
Rohrer, Doug, 145
Role- playing in business 
coaching, 241, 252
Rule learning, 133; compared to 
example learning, 155– 157, 
278– 279n15; and structure 
building, 157
Rumsfeld, Donald, 17
Schema induction, 278n14
Science courses: achievement 
gap in, 232– 234, 283n7; in 
Columbia Public School 
District, 238– 239
Self- directed learning, 123– 124, 
274n18; fl ashcards in, 44, 
124, 274n19
Sensory skill retraining, 168– 169
September 11th terrorist 
attacks, fl ashbulb memories 
of, 118, 273n14
Shooting an azimuth, testing as, 
21, 235– 236
Short- answer tests, 41, 262n14
Short- term memory, 49, 72– 73, 
75, 82, 100; encoding of 
information in, 100; forgetting 
of, 72– 73, 100; in massed 
practice, 82; retrieval from, 
90, 100
Simulation training: in football 
practice, 61– 62; in Jiffy Lube 
University, 246; in military 
jump school training, 61– 72; 
in medical school, 57– 58; of 
pi lots, 11– 12, 20; of police, 
128– 130; practice like you 
play, 57– 58, 85– 86, 130; 
role- play as simulation, 241, 
243– 244, 252
Skinner, B. F., 90, 270n16
Sleep, consolidation of memory 
in, 63, 73, 267n4
Smoke jump training, 78
Sobel, Andrew, 37– 39, 64, 125, 
227, 261n10
Social contagion of memory, 
117, 273n12
Social infl uences on memory, 
116– 117
Socioeconomic status, and 
intelligence quotient, 174, 
175
Songs, as mnemonic devices, 189
Spaced practice, 4, 48– 49, 66, 
203– 205; in baseball training, 
80; in commercial training, 
240; consolidation of memory 
in, 63, 75, 82; effort in, 4, 47,

Index 
ê 310
Spaced practice (continued)
 49, 81, 82, 205; fl ashcards 
in, 64, 204; of football team, 
61– 62; forgetting in, 63, 
82; habit strength in, 63; 
interleaving in, 64; of lifelong 
learners, 219, 220; massed 
practice compared to, 47, 48, 
49, 204– 205, 263– 264n2; in 
medical education, 48– 49, 
212, 214– 215, 264n3; in 
military jump school training, 
71; neurogenesis in, 172; in 
pi lot training, 12; of medical 
student, 213– 215; of psychol-
ogy student, 217; rehearsal in, 
76; reloading in, 82, 268n10; 
in rereading, 14, 15; strength 
of learning in, 48; as study 
strategy, 203– 205; as teaching 
strategy, 228; in testing, 32, 
40, 43; time between sessions 
in, 63
Spatial disorientation of pi lots, 
108, 271n3
Spatial intelligence, 147
Spivey, Michelle, 36
Sports training: for baseball, 6– 7, 
79– 81, 85, 86, 206, 268n9; for 
football, 60– 62, 120, 124, 198, 
222; for ice hockey, 52, 65; 
interleaved practice in, 61, 62, 
65, 80, 206; massed practice 
in, 52, 80, 81; practice like 
you play in, 85– 86; retrieval 
practice in, 62
Standardized testing, 18, 19, 
30, 151
Sternberg, Robert, 18, 148– 151, 
276n9
Structure building, 133, 
153– 155, 160– 161, 277n13; 
in refl ection, 155; and rule 
learning, 157
Students, 201– 217; in medical 
education, 211– 215 (See also 
Medical education); in peer 
instruction, 125– 126, 
230– 231; in psychology 
course, 16, 89– 90, 163, 186, 
190– 194, 216– 217; refl ection 
of, 209– 210; retrieval practice 
of, 201– 205; self- directed 
learning of, 123– 124, 274n18; 
spaced practice of, 203– 205; 
study techniques of (See Study 
techniques); tips for teachers 
of, 225– 239
Study techniques, 16, 201– 217; 
calibration of judgment in, 
210– 211; elaboration in, 
207– 208, 214, 215, 227, 
231; generation in, 208– 209; 
interleaved practice in, 
205– 207; massed practice or 
cramming in, 3, 9– 10, 31, 44, 
48, 63, 203, 226; of medical 
students, 211– 215 (See also 
Medical education); mnemonic 
devices in, 186, 190– 194, 
196– 197, 211; of psychology 
students, 16, 89– 90, 163, 
186, 190– 194, 211, 216– 217; 
refl ection in, 209– 210; 
rereading in, 42, 202; retrieval 
practice and testing in, 41, 

Index 
ê 311
201– 205, 262n15; spaced 
practice in, 203– 205; in 
student- directed learning, 
124; teacher explanations 
on, 226
Study tips: for students, 
201– 217; for lifelong 
learners, 217– 225
Suggestion, distortion of 
memory in, 113– 114
Sullenberger, Chesley, 223
Summary sheets, 208, 231
Surgical training: refl ection in, 
26– 27; retrieval practice in, 
23– 27, 29; spaced practice 
in, 48– 49, 264n3
Swonk, Diane, 139
Synapses: formation of, 
166– 167; pruning of, 167; 
structures in twins, 170
Synthesis of knowledge, in 
Bloom’s taxonomy of 
learning, 229
Teaching methods, 225– 239; for 
achievement in science courses, 
232– 234, 283n7; in Columbia 
Public School District 
(Illinois), 33– 37, 238– 239; 
fi re hose instruction in, 10, 
12; learning paragraphs in, 
89, 210, 232; and learning 
styles, 145– 146, 275n6; of 
Matthews, 234– 236; of 
McDermott, 227, 236– 238; 
in medicine, 57– 60; peer 
instruction in, 125– 126, 
230– 231; of Sobel, 37– 39, 
64, 125, 227; summary sheets 
in, 208, 231; Thayer method, 
234, 236; transparency in, 
228, 229– 230, 237; of 
Wenderoth, 89, 208, 210, 
228– 234, 236
Teams, complementary areas of 
expertise in, 127– 128
Testing, 4– 5, 19– 20; anxiety in, 
91– 92; benefi ts of, 42– 43, 44, 
125, 202– 203, 263n17; in 
Columbia Public School 
District, 20, 33– 37, 238, 
258n13, 260n8; in commer-
cial training, 240; cramming 
for, 3, 31, 44, 48, 63, 203, 
226; delayed, 43; dynamic, 
151– 152, 159, 277n12; errors 
in, 39– 40, 44, 91; as false 
mea sure of ability, 19; 
familiarity affecting, 64; fear 
of failure in, 91– 92; feedback 
on answers in, 39– 40, 44; 
frequency of, 44, 125, 
203– 204, 263n17; in illusion 
of mastery, 4– 5, 16, 17, 116, 
210; in intelligence mea sure-
ment, 147, 148– 149; in Jiffy 
Lube University, 245, 246; in 
jump school training, 69– 70, 
72; in learning style research, 
145; as learning tool, 19– 20, 
31, 125, 201– 205, 
258– 259nn13–14; massed 
practice or cramming for, 
3, 31, 48, 63; in medical 
education, 57, 60, 213, 214, 
265– 266n10; memory cues 

Index 
ê 312
Testing (continued)
 in preparation for, 186, 
190– 194, 196– 197, 211; 
multiple- choice tests in, 41, 
261n12, 262n14; open- book, 
40, 261– 262n13; overestima-
tion of competence in, 
121– 122; and peer instruc-
tion in groups, 230– 231; in 
psychology course, 16, 90, 
186, 190– 194, 216, 217; 
recall of information after, 
19– 20, 29, 30– 32, 259n5; 
repetition of, 31– 32, 44, 125, 
203– 204, 263n17; rereading 
compared to, 41, 42, 44, 
202– 203; rereading 
in preparation for, 14, 15; 
restudying missed material in, 
42, 211; as retrieval practice, 
19– 20, 28– 44, 201– 203; as 
shooting an azimuth, 21, 
235– 236; short- answer tests 
in, 41, 262n14; in spaced 
practice, 203– 204, 205; 
standardized, 18, 19, 30, 
151; student attitudes toward, 
42; in student- directed 
learning, 123– 124; taxonomy 
of learning levels in, 232; as 
teaching strategy, 226– 227, 
232, 234– 235, 236– 238; in 
Thayer method, 234, 236. 
See also Retrieval practice
Testing effect, 19– 20, 28– 44, 
212, 240
Testing groups, 230– 231
Thayer, Sylvanus, 234
Thayer method, 234, 236
Thinking, Fast and Slow 
(Kahneman), 105
Thomson, Donald M., 115, 
272n10
Time between practice sessions, 
4, 48– 49; 203– 204, 215. 
See also Spaced practice
Tips for lifelong learners, 
217– 225; for students, 
201– 217; for teachers, 
225– 239; for trainers, 
239– 252
Tough, Paul, 182– 183
Toyota Motor Company, 249
Training methods, 239– 252; 
of Renewal by Andersen, 
247– 250; of Farmers 
Insurance, 50, 241– 244; 
in- service training in, 
239– 240; of Jiffy Lube, 
245– 247; of Inner Gate 
Acu punc ture, 250– 252; of 
Maixner Group, 240– 241; 
for pi lots (See Pi lot training); 
for police, 128– 130, 222; in 
sports (See Sports training)
Transfer of learning, 85– 86, 
157, 278n14
Transparency in teaching 
strategies, 228, 229– 230, 
237
Tulving, Endel, 13– 14, 258n8, 
259n6, 267n5
Twain, Mark, 187– 188, 194, 
211, 282n22
Twin studies on neural circuitry, 
170

Index 
ê 313
Undesirable diffi culties, 92, 
98– 99
United States Military Academy 
at West Point, 234– 236
University of California, Los 
Angeles, 170
University of Georgia, 60, 
222
University of New Mexico, 
14
University of Southern Califor-
nia, 216
University of Washington, 
228
Varied practice, 4, 51– 53, 65– 66; 
anagram study of, 52– 53, 
264– 265n6; beanbag study 
of, 46, 51; of bird identifi ca-
tion, 55; of cognitive skills, 
52– 53; of discrimination 
skills, 53– 55, 101; effort in, 
47, 81; of football team, 61, 
62; habit strength in, 63, 65; 
of lifelong learners, 219; 
massed practice compared 
to, 47, 53– 55; mastery in, 
84; in medical education, 58; 
of motor skills, 46, 51– 52, 
264n5; in pi lot training, 12; 
as teaching strategy, 228; 
transfer of learning in, 
85– 86
VARK approach to learning 
styles, 144
Virgin Atlantic Airways, 139
Virgin Rec ords, 139
Visual images as memory cues, 
186– 188, 193– 194, 195– 196, 
211, 224, 281– 282n21
Visual learning style, 144, 145
Washington University, 14, 209, 
236; Medical School of, 56
Weatherford, Jack, 189
Wehrenberg, Jon, 36
Wenderoth, Mary Pat, 126, 208, 
228– 234, 236, 283n6; class 
structure used by, 232– 233, 
236; learning paragraphs used 
by, 89, 210, 232; summary 
sheets used by, 208, 231
West Point Military Academy, 
234– 236
White matter, 169– 170
Working memory: in brain 
training exercises, 176, 177; 
capacity of, 91, 176, 196; 
encoding of information in, 
100; and fl uid intelligence, 
176– 178; number of digits 
available in, 196; test 
anxiety affecting, 91, 92
Writer’s block, 220– 221
Write- to- learn, 89– 90, 269n15; 
and learning paragraphs, 89, 
210, 232
Wynveen, Richard, 248– 250, 
284n13
Young, Michael, 211– 215, 228, 
283n1
Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, 24
