Overcoming

Harm

Mindfulness and CBT Tools
for Coping with
Unwanted Violent Thoughts

JON HERSHFIELD, MFT |
Foreword by JONATHAN GRAYSON, PHD


“If you have obsessions and compulsions related to the fear of harm, you should
have this book! Jon Hershfield has an engaging writing style and a keen
understanding of this problem that he passes along to the reader. Most
importantly, he pulls together scientifically supported interventions into a useful
self-help format. The numerous illustrations and examples will help you
implement these strategies and overcome your harm-related OCD symptoms.”
—Jonathan S. Abramowitz, PhD, professor in the department 
of psychology at the University of North Carolina (UNC) at Chapel Hill,
and director of the UNC Anxiety and Stress Clinic
“I have often thought of harming Jon, since I am jealous that he writes these
really good books that I wish I had written instead of him. But I will sit with that
thought and just be happy with the fact that I have a great reference to refer my
patients and my students to when questions of Harm OCD arise in therapy and
supervision. Good work, Jon. This book will be a great addition to the OCD
literature. Just watch your back…”
—Patrick B. McGrath, PhD, assistant vice president and 
residential services clinical director at AMITA Health, 
Foglia Family Foundation Residential Treatment Center
“Overcoming Harm OCD is a remarkable contribution to the self-help literature
on OCD. Hershfield has a masterful way of presenting complex concepts in an
easy-to-understand manner and then linking them with effective therapeutic
strategies. This book will be a valuable resource for individuals with Harm OCD,
as well as applied practitioners who work with individuals with OCD or who
simply want to learn more.”
—Eric Storch, PhD, vice chair, professor, and McIngvale 
Presidential Endowed Chair at the Menninger Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences at Baylor College of Medicine

“If you have Harm OCD, the best thing you can do is work with a skilled
therapist trained in cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) for OCD like Jon
Hershfield. The next best thing is to use Overcoming Harm OCD to help yourself.
If you do find a good therapist, they may recommend the book too; I know I will
recommend it for my Harm OCD patients.”
—James Claiborn, PhD, ABPP, ACT, psychologist specializing 
in OCD and related disorders, diplomate of the American Board 
of Professional Psychology in Counseling Psychology, diplomate 
and founding fellow of the Academy of Cognitive Therapy, and coauthor of
The Habit Change Workbook and The BDD Workbook
“Overcoming Harm OCD is an invaluable resource for anyone afflicted by
inexplicable violent thoughts that they are terrified of acting upon, even while
realizing their fears are irrational. The author, OCD therapist Jon Hershfield,
writes with a deep compassion for all who suffer from Harm OCD, but too often
won’t seek the help they need due to unwarranted feelings of shame. In this
easily readable, inspiring, and informative book, he expertly explains why the best
way to deal with Harm OCD is to lean into it and learn how to live with
uncertainty. I’m putting it on my ‘highly recommended’ list.”
—Jonathan Hoffman, PhD, ABPP, licensed psychologist, 
cofounder and clinical director of the Neurobehavioral Institute and NBI
Ranch in Southeast Florida, member of the Scientific 
and Clinical Advisory Board of the International OCD Foundation
(IOCDF), and author of Stuck
“Whether you battle violent obsessions as a sufferer or treatment provider, Jon
Hershfield’s Overcoming Harm OCD will prove to be a potent weapon in your
arsenal. As one of the nation’s most respected OCD psychotherapists and
authors, Jon offers his wisdom and wit in a wonderfully organized and enjoyable-
to-read format. His masterful integration of components of cognitive therapy,
exposure and response prevention (ERP), acceptance and mindfulness, and self-
compassion provide the reader with very practical and effective ways to deflate
the debilitating distress that OCD delivers.”

—Charles Brady, PhD, ABPP, director of the OCD and anxiety program at
the Lindner Center of HOPE; vice president at 
OCD Midwest; associate professor in the department of 
psychiatry and behavioral neuroscience at the University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine
“Overcoming Harm OCD breaks down the complexity of Harm OCD into easy-
to-understand and practical language. Jon Hershfield’s masterful description of
unwanted violent obsessions will be greatly appreciated by those affected by these
symptoms. His step-by-step instructions and helpful road map for incorporating
acceptance and self-compassion are sure to encourage, strengthen, and enhance
CBT treatment. This is a must-have resource for clients and professionals alike!”
—Amy Jacobsen, PhD, licensed psychologist specializing in 
the treatment of OCD in Kansas, and coauthor of 
Childhood Anxiety Disorders
“You aren’t crazy or bad; you are human. Being human means dealing with
difficult things, and OCD is a difficult thing, albeit a very difficult thing. Jon’s
book addresses the concerns you may have around these challenging thoughts of
harm; makes you feel a little bit more normal; and focuses on helping you
through it using examples, exercises, and questions. All wrapped in the gold-
standard science of CBT for OCD, and supported by mindfulness and self-love.
Jon addresses the ways one deals with shame, an often-overlooked emotion that
holds back recovery. Having interviewed Jon a few times, I can confidently say
that he knows his stuff, but more importantly, he cares.”
—Stuart Ralph, The OCD Stories

“If you have OCD and suffer from violent obsessions, this is the book you need!
Jon Hershfield understands the depth of how frightening harm obsessions can be
and the intricacies involved when seeking reassurance from the uncertainty they
provoke. His compassion for OCD sufferers is demonstrated on every page, and
his guidance and knowledge about applying well-established treatment
components to face specific harm obsessions offers a clear path to reclaiming
your life from OCD. Whether you suffer from harm obsessions or treat clients
who do, this book will be become your go-to resource!”
—Joan Davidson, PhD, codirector of the San Francisco Bay Area Center for
Cognitive Therapy; assistant professor in the clinical science program at
University of California, Berkeley; and author 
of Daring to Challenge OCD
“Hershfield has done it! Using straight-up honesty, compassion, and
appropriately placed humor, he has written a body of work tackling the
‘untouchable’ subject of harm obsessions in OCD. I predict that this book
becomes the go-to reference for current and future generations of OCD sufferers,
their loved ones, and treating clinicians. Hershfield has deftly avoided being
drawn into providing excessive reassurance, which OCD would surely love!
Rather, he gifts the reader with tools to live with the uncertainty that we must all
face as human beings—specifically with respect to our past and future actions.”
—S. Evelyn Stewart, MD, associate professor in the department 
of psychiatry at the University of British Columbia and director of the
Provincial OCD Program at the BC Children’s Hospital
“If you have Harm OCD, reading this book will be life-changing. No more
thinking you’re ‘going crazy.’ No more avoiding the life you used to love. No
more thinking your thoughts aren’t normal, because they—and you—are. In
Overcoming Harm OCD, Jon compassionately demonstrates the H.E.A.Ling
power of standing up to your OCD so you can build the full and meaningful life
you deserve.”
—Shala Nicely, LPC, author of Is Fred in the Refrigerator? Taming OCD and
Reclaiming My Life and cofounder, Beyond the Doubt

“Jon Hershfield has created a masterful, reader-friendly guide to helping
individuals with Harm OCD by utilizing step-by-step tools and evidence-based
treatment methods. Because this form of OCD is less commonly discussed, I’m
glad there is finally a book that provides an in-depth look into the thoughts and
experiences of individuals with Harm OCD. This book is a must-read for anyone
struggling with unwanted, intrusive violent obsessions, and should be a required
read for all clinicians treating clients with Harm OCD.”
—Tabasom Vahidi, PhD, private practice, works for the 
Westwood Institute for Anxiety Disorders, Inc.
“Harm OCD is a powerful demon that makes people question their sanity and
integrity as a person. Jon eloquently reminds those struggling with this form of
OCD that they are not crazy and that self-compassion is important. Through
evidence-based strategies, Jon breaks down how to overcome this disabling fear,
learn to accept doubt and uncertainty, and live life to its fullest potential. This
book is sure to bring hope and relief to those suffering by offering a guided,
succinct, easy-to-understand process to overcome their worst fears.”
—Robin Zasio, PsyD, LCSW, director at The Anxiety Treatment Center of
Sacramento, Roseville, and El Dorado Hills; and author of The Hoarder in
You
“With kind and compassionate humor, Jon Hershfield accomplishes the brilliant
task of making a very difficult topic approachable and manageable. Thank you,
Jon, for gifting the OCD and mental health communities with your incredible
knowledge and insight.”
—Kimberley Quinlan, LMFT, owner of www.cbtschool.com (providing
research-based online courses for OCD, body-focused repetitive behavior
(BFRB), and anxiety), and host of the 
Your Anxiety Toolkit podcast

“Jon Hershfield has a gift for writing as if speaking to friends; I know this, as I’m
privileged to call Jon a friend, and the wisdom he shares in these pages is
imparted with all the warmth, clarity, and compassion that Jon has shown in
every conversation we’ve ever had. By using his extraordinary communication
skills to address Harm OCD, Jon offers readers the rare opportunity to learn
about this especially difficult mental health challenge from a truly caring and
trustworthy friend.”
—Jeff Bell, author of Rewind, Replay, Repeat: A Memoir of OCD
“No matter how it manifests, OCD is painful and disruptive, but Harm OCD
tends to add another layer of guilt and shame to the mix. In Overcoming Harm
OCD, Jon Hershfield recommends love and self-compassion as highly as the
gold-standard, evidence-based treatments of the disorder. Using his own
H.E.A.L. method to tackle the four main types of harm obsessions, Hershfield
walks through common obsessions, compulsions, and example scripts. A resource
readers can turn to again and again, Overcoming Harm OCD will empower
readers to seek help and open up to loved ones.”
—Alison Dotson, author of Being Me with OCD

Overcoming

Harm

OCD

Mindfulness and CBT Tools
for Coping with
Unwanted Violent Thoughts

JON HERSHFIELD, MFT

“Into whatsoever houses I enter, I will enter to help the sick, and I will
abstain from all intentional wrongdoing and harm, especially from
abusing the bodies of man or woman, bond or free.”
—Hippocrates (fifth century BCE)

Foreword
As Jon mentions in his acknowledgments, I don’t write forewords—but here I
am. This fact says a great deal about Jon, what I know about him, and why this
book is an important addition to OCD therapy. I remember my first meeting with
Jon as he was just beginning his rise in the field. We were at a dinner of our peers,
all OCD therapists, and the dinner was coming to an end. This was his chance to
make an impression. He was sitting across the table from me and caught my eye.
Wordlessly, he took the last piece of pizza, licked it, and offered it to me. Never
one to turn down a challenge, I took a bite, contaminated it with something
worse, and handed it back to him. The contamination challenges escalated,
ending with shoes on top of the final remains of the pizza, and, of course, we ate
it all. Jon had read the situation, recognized what he had to do, and then boldly
and bravely executed his plan, resulting in the outcome he had hoped for. Clearly
Jon Hershfield was destined for greatness.
Obsessions about harming are among the most difficult for sufferers to bear.
Unlike contamination fears or checking rituals, sharing obsessions about harming
is difficult—people outside the OCD community may misunderstand you and
believe that you really are at great risk of “snapping” and acting out your fears. In
Overcoming Harm OCD, Jon provides a place for you to finally understand what
is happening to you. And like the night I first met him, when he assessed his
audience and knew exactly what to do, Jon not only understands Harm OCD, he
is able to explain what is happening to you, why it is happening, and what you
need to do. You will find the experience of reading this book more like having a
conversation with someone whose expertise and gentle humor make complicated
concepts accessible and understandable.
The first two chapters of the book will help you to understand the nature of
Harm OCD and the core techniques you will utilize in your treatment. Jon’s
HEAL acronym for remembering the four cornerstone components of your
treatment (cognitive techniques, exposure and response prevention, acceptance
and mindfulness, and self-compassion—you will have to read the book to see

how he turns this into the HEAL acronym) is only one example of how he makes
difficult concepts seem crystal clear.
Armed with the knowledge from those first two chapters, Jon then focuses on
the different manifestations of Harm OCD and provides you with examples of
the kinds of obsessions and compulsions you are likely to have and details about
what you need to do for each of them. What I found most useful in these
chapters is the fact that everything made logical sense. I always tell my clients
that I don’t want them to do anything that I tell them to do unless it makes
sense. This book doesn’t offer any magic solutions, but it does offer the next best
thing: clear, definable steps that you can follow. Although it may not be easy,
following these steps will free you from the confines of OCD.
Equally important to describing how to regain control of your life is Jon’s
explanation of what recovery from OCD looks like. It is not stopping the
thoughts that you don’t like having; it is learning to be able to think anything and
to cope with the resulting uncertainty. The way in which you differ from others is
not the content of your thoughts. The difference between you and nonsufferers is
your obsessive attempts to be 100% certain as to what those thoughts might
mean (for example, Am I bad? Am I more likely to do x?). Jon’s book shows you
how you can live with uncertainty.
In summary, I urge you to listen to Jon and to learn from his understanding of
OCD and his ability to translate that understanding into a clear treatment plan
for successfully managing and coping with your OCD. And I hope that you, like
Jon at that dinner where I first met him, will boldly and bravely execute that plan
and start your journey to freedom.
—Jonathan Grayson
The Grayson LA Treatment Center for Anxiety and OCD
Pasadena, California

Introduction
You’re going to be okay. Before I say anything else, let me say this. You’re going to
be okay. You are not crazy. You are not a horrible person. If this book makes any
sense to you at all, then you will come to understand how a glitch in your mind is
making you think you’re a monster. But you are not a monster. You’re going to get
on top of this.
This is a book about overcoming Harm OCD (or aggressive obsessions), a form
of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) that manifests primarily as intrusive
thoughts about behaving in a way that would purposefully or unintentionally
cause harm to oneself or others (Moulding, Aardema, and O’Connor 2014).
There are four well-understood dimensions of OCD, known as harm,
unacceptable thoughts, contamination, and symmetry (Abramowitz et al. 2010).
These are not four different disorders, but four ways in which unwanted thoughts
and compulsive responses manifest in OCD. This book sets out to organize what
we understand about OCD when it manifests in this particular dimension. It also
offers a series of strategies that work for any kind of OCD, but allows the reader
to tailor it specifically to Harm OCD.
When I was first learning to stand up to my own OCD, I found a great deal of
solace in taking part in online support groups. It was there that I read the stories
of thousands of other brave OCD sufferers. Some of these people shared my
particular obsessions, some of them didn’t, but most of them seemed to think the
same way I did. Many of them identified as having “Harm” OCD. I don’t
personally identify as having Harm OCD, but I have always experienced some
kind of steady stream of unsolicited mental junkmail, often involving violent or
repugnant thoughts. I noticed in those online forums that I had many of the
same unwanted thoughts as Harm OCD sufferers, except that I was not worried
that those thoughts would be acted on. On the contrary, when I was around thirteen
and discovered horror movies, I felt comforted by what I saw. Someone else was
picking up this signal in his head too! The first time I saw the film Hellraiser, in
which characters are routinely stripped of their skin with hooks attached to

chains by deformed monsters whose clothes are sewn into their own flesh, it
produced in me a bizarre sense of peace. When I saw the film’s iconic monster, an
articulate demon with nails hammered all over his face in a perfectly symmetrical
grid pattern, I thought: Now there’s a guy who knows about staying calm under
pressure and living with the unwanted!
I think my decision early on to go ahead and just have the violent thoughts,
instead of trying to block them out, inoculated me from allowing this type of
OCD to fully take shape. I required therapy only for the thoughts I refused to
accept. I think I barely missed having Harm OCD because I decided early on
that my intrusive violent thoughts weren’t going anywhere; that I could live with
them and that I didn’t have to worry about them becoming actions or keeping me
from living a joyful life. These are lessons that I hope you, too, can learn from
this book.
There May Be Triggers Ahead
In this book, I will be talking about violent obsessions, and this means I will be
using some potentially upsetting words to describe how violent obsessions are
experienced. I will also be giving examples of ways to expose oneself to the fear of
violent thoughts, and this necessarily means using violent words. I may mention
the name of a weapon that triggers your unwanted thoughts. I may describe a
narrative about a person being harmed in a violent way, which may trigger your
unwanted thoughts. I will not pull any punches (pun intended?) and may speak
frankly, bluntly, or at times even brutally or obscenely. I will try to do what OCD
refuses to do and couch my abrasive language in a helpful context, but
nonetheless, you may find some of the material in this book discomforting.
Though this book cannot function as a replacement for treatment, I hope it
can shine some light on your symptoms and your well-deserved hope for getting
past them.
About This Book
Typically, I would recommend reading an OCD book cover-to-cover even if there
are chapters that don’t seem to apply to you. There is a lot to be learned about
one form of OCD by understanding other forms of it. However, given how

focused on a specific theme this book is, it could be equally effective if you read
through the first two chapters (on assessment, understanding violent thoughts,
and treatment tools) and then jump to the chapter you think most applies to you
after that. Some readers may be concerned that reading about different ways
Harm OCD manifests could result in more material for the OCD to attach to. If
this is your concern, that’s quite all right. My hope is that by the end of the book,
you will have a better understanding of your mind and its relationship to Harm
OCD and that you will intuitively grasp that you don’t need to be afraid of new
thoughts. They are, after all, just other thoughts. Perhaps you will later return to
the rest of the book out of curiosity about your fellow Harm OCD sufferers.
Part 1 of this book is a primer on Harm OCD, how it is assessed and how it can
be treated. In chapter 1, I go over what Harm OCD is, some theories as to why
we have violent thoughts, and how clinicians assess for OCD and distinguish
violent obsessions in this disorder from other kinds of relationships people have
to their violent thoughts. In chapter 2, I discuss the role of uncertainty
acceptance in mastering your Harm OCD and four treatment tools to get you
there: cognitive approaches, exposure and response prevention, mindfulness, and
self-compassion.
Part 2 of this book separates Harm OCD into focused subthemes and takes the
tools described in part 1 and applies them to each of these in detail. As
mentioned above, you may want to jump to your subtheme on the first reading if
you feel nervous about exposing yourself to other variations of Harm OCD you
haven’t already come across. Chapter 3 explores the fear of having or developing
a harmful identity, including the fear of intending harm and of causing harm
through a failure of responsibility. Chapter 4 discusses unwanted intrusive
thoughts about impulsively harming others through violence. Chapter 5 focuses
on unwanted thoughts of self-harm. Chapter 6 addresses Harm OCD that
specifically focuses on harming one’s children.
Part 3 is about the next steps. Chapter 7 discusses how to access appropriate
treatment for your Harm OCD, understanding Harm OCD in children, and
disclosing your condition to your loved ones and others in ways that allow them
to be an effective part of your support network. Chapter 8 brings our journey to a
close with a discussion of the role of shame in Harm OCD and ways to achieve
long-term mastery over your obsessions.

Who Are the Harm OCD Sufferers?
I’m going to introduce you to four fictional people, composites of people I’ve
encountered in my clinical work and in the process of my contributions to online
support groups. Each of these characters represents a version of what I will be
referring to as Harm OCD throughout this book.
Joanna
Joanna put the roach traps exactly where the exterminator said they should go, well
out of reach of the children and pets. Then she took out the trash, and then washed
her hands. An hour later, the thought popped into her head that her husband
usually takes out the trash. Then it occurred to her that she had taken out the trash
with hands that had touched the roach traps and could potentially have had poison
on them. Did she know this when she touched the trash cans? Did she intentionally
leave poison on the trash cans for her husband to later touch? Should she warn
him? Does this indicate that somewhere deep in her subconscious she is some kind of
closeted sociopath who doesn’t care if her husband lives or dies? Why did she allow
potential harm to come someone’s way? Is she a bad person? Then the confessing
started…Every day, multiple times a day, her husband had to be on the receiving
end of detailed descriptions of what she touched, what she thought, and when. He
had to respond that he understood and that he didn’t believe she was a dangerous
person, but she would never be completely satisfied by his answers, and the
confessions and questions persisted.
I’ll explore Joanna’s challenges in more detail in chapter 3. To your friends and
family, you may be thought of as a worrywart, or maybe even a pessimist or cynic.
But you know that your concerns run much deeper than the outside world can
appreciate. For you, it’s a battle for your humanity, a battle of good versus evil
wherein your side of the battle gets determined only at the end. But developing
mastery over your OCD reveals a much more joyful life ahead.
Mandy
Mandy remembers exactly where she was sitting when she saw the news about
Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School. A young man had walked into the school
and begun shooting, killing seventeen children and wounding several others. Mandy

asked her husband, “Why would someone do that?” He just shrugged, an
unsatisfying answer. How could someone do that? Something in her made her want
to check the news again, collect more information. Why did she even want to collect
more information? The more she thought about it, the more she found herself
asking, How do I know I wouldn’t do that? Why can’t I control these thoughts?
Then the nightmare began…Everything that had anything to do with violence
became completely overwhelming. The TV couldn’t be trusted, even books at school
that mentioned violent acts led to tearful nights of tossing and turning. Sharp objects
or weapons of any kind had to be avoided or they would come with thoughts of
mentally “snapping” and lunging maniacally at people in a fit of bloodlust. She was
pretty sure the other day when she saw her husband cutting a tomato that she felt
something in her hand like she was about to grab the knife from him and plunge it
into his throat. She kept telling herself she would never do it and then she’d start
having thoughts like, You could have done it, you might do it, better stay away just
in case. Even places where violent things might have happened couldn’t be visited in
case they reminded her of her feared secret self.
If you relate to Mandy’s story, you may feel that life is like walking a never-
ending tightrope on a windy day. I’ll cover Mandy’s assets and liabilities in the
fight against OCD in chapter 4. You’re not an abomination because of these
thoughts. You have a particular sensitivity to these naturally occurring mental
events and you’re here right now learning to address it.
Elizabeth
Elizabeth was not suicidal. She was not even depressed. Sure, she got low moods
from time to time, and even joked about how she’d rather die than go to work
tomorrow for that meeting. One day she was looking out her office window on the
fourth floor and the thought occurred, What if I jumped? At first it didn’t bother her
at all, just one of those silly thoughts she gets sometimes. But then, on her drive
home, the thought popped into her head, What if I just turned my car into the
oncoming traffic? She turned the radio on to distract herself. Nirvana. Didn’t the
lead singer of Nirvana kill himself? One by one, everything seemed to lead her to
think about killing or maiming herself for no reason. She started to wonder if these
were signs, not coincidences, and what if she had some underlying motive to commit

suicide? She took all the knives and hid them away. Better take all the pills in the
house and get rid of them too, she thought. No more driving, too scary. What about
bleach? She could drink bleach! Better get rid of it, she thought. She loved her life,
but now it didn’t matter how much she reassured herself, something in her mind
seemed to be trying to kill her!
But it doesn’t have to all fall apart from there. OCD seems to strip you of all
the things that make you free, one at a time, making your existence narrower and
narrower until you beg for mercy. But there’s nothing crazy about wanting to feel
confident in your faculties, wanting to feel safe in your own skin and safe from
leaving your loved ones behind. The question is, how can you access that
confidence without just surviving from compulsion to compulsion? Becoming a
student of your Harm OCD can put you back in command of your life. I’ll
explore Elizabeth’s brand of Harm OCD in chapter 5.
Richard
Richard was so proud of being a dad. His infant son had just started to make eye
contact with him. One day, for no apparent reason, the thought popped into his
head, I could shoot my son. Richard hated guns, why would he even think of that?
Suddenly it seemed that guns were everywhere. Sporting goods stores sell them, gun
shows come to town, his neighbor goes hunting…he could get the gun from the
neighbor! Could he do it? Why? Why would he even want to know this? He loves
his son, doesn’t he? Doesn’t he??? Grotesque images of his sweet, innocent baby’s
shattered brains inside the crib flooded his mind nearly every waking moment. Even
sleep provided no respite, as he would simply dream of guns and blood all night. His
wife became frustrated with him as he would always find ways to avoid being alone
with his son and rarely volunteered to help with diaper changes or bathing. But how
could he take the risk of being a dad if it meant risking his son’s life?
Loving someone as much as you love your child can be a magnet for Harm
OCD. The worst thing you can imagine is being responsible for causing your
child pain or death. If you relate to Richard’s story, it may seem incredibly unfair
that the universe puts this helpless creature in your hands and also gives you a
mind that seems to delight in challenging your competence as a parent. The tips

and tools discussed in chapter 6 can help you liberate yourself from OCD’s
trickery.
The four brave souls above represent the four forms of violent obsessions I will
be discussing in this book—fear of having a harmful identity, fear of acting out
harmfully to others, fear of self-harming, and fear of harming one’s children.
They do not capture every specific way Harm OCD manifests, and it is not
unusual to have elements of each of these examples co-occurring. Your OCD
may be telling you right now that you don’t fit perfectly into any of the above
stories and that this must mean something dreadful about you. Try to reserve
judgment against yourself and let the OCD go ahead and read the book
alongside you. Try to respond to its incessant negative commentary the way my
wife responds to my wisecracks when we watch romantic comedies (she ignores
me, I think).

I
PART 1
Understanding Harm OCD
n this section of the book, I will discuss some OCD basics, and more
specifically, what Harm OCD is and what it is not. I will also explore the
nature of violent thoughts and the role uncertainty acceptance plays in
OCD. Lastly, I will identify some of the main tools and techniques that are
effective for OCD treatment. There’s a lot of information coming your way, and
don’t be surprised when your OCD tells you it’s too much to handle. Also, get
ready for incoming thoughts about not having OCD in the first place! OCD
wants you to view this book as a “get out of harm free” card. Anything you read
that doesn’t fit perfectly with your worries will get used by the OCD as evidence
that your fears will come true. It’s okay to pace yourself. Read this book slowly if
it’s overwhelming right now. It’s also okay to let those thoughts come and go.

CHAPTER 1
Defining Harm OCD
What do we mean when we say “Harm OCD”? How is it assessed and diagnosed?
Right, all you want to know right now is whether or not you are going to hurt
someone (or yourself). But bear with me. The answer to this question will be
more impactful when you understand more about OCD overall. In my clinical
experience, OCD sufferers often start off on the wrong foot, presuming that their
thoughts are irrational madness. This is not technically true, at least not in the
way you are likely to see it. There’s nothing irrational, or even unusual, about
wanting to keep yourself and others safe, about wanting to be a morally
responsible person, or about wanting to be confident that you’ll be able to
experience and share joy without your mind ruining every moment. These are
reasonable things to desire. Where things get distorted, or disordered, is when we
seek certainty about our fears and try too hard to guarantee that they won’t come
true.
Understanding Violent Obsessions in OCD
OCD is a common mental health challenge characterized by unwanted intrusive
thoughts that are upsetting as well as by compulsions, which are behaviors aimed
at reducing this distress (American Psychiatric Association [APA] 2013).
Approximately 2.3% of adults experience clinically diagnosable OCD at some
point in their life (Ruscio et al. 2010). According to the APA’s Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual V (DSM-V), obsessions and compulsions must be time-
consuming and/or cause distress or impairment, and they can’t be attributed to
some other mental disorder or medical condition (APA 2013).
Obsessions Are…

We usually associate the word “obsession” with thoughts only, but the DSM-V
also includes images and urges in this category (APA 2013). Since we tend to
think of our obsessions as unwanted thoughts, but think of urges as synonymous
with desires, the language can be scary and confusing. Understanding the
meaning of each term in the context of OCD can help.
Thoughts: The problem with defining the word “thought” is that every
definition we have of “thought” is just a synonym for the word. We use words like
idea, opinion, notion, and so on. A thought is a mental event of some kind and
the problem with such a loose and abstract definition is that it provides us with
little information about how seriously we are supposed to take our thoughts. Let’s
agree that a thought is a mental event that you become aware of. A good way to
conceptualize it is the internal experience put into language. For example, I may
have a memory of eating eggs for breakfast and the thought is “I had eggs for
breakfast.” Or the thought may present as a question, as in, “What did I have for
breakfast?” Or the thought could present as an idea, such as, “I should have eggs
for breakfast.” The intrinsic value of any thought is unknown. It is simply made
up of words, like you might come across in a book. When we identify these
mental events as unwanted or intrusive, and repetitive, we call them obsessions.
Images: While many thoughts come in the form of language, it is also common
to experience thoughts as images or pictures in the mind. In OCD, these images
may come suddenly, like a flash of a still-frame image projected onto the screen
of the mind, or they may come repeatedly, like scenes of a scary movie unfolding
in your head. Though these images are not literally being seen with the eyes (as
in a visual hallucination), the vivid imagination of an OCD sufferer can make
the experience plenty upsetting. Problems arise when we try to get certainty
about why the images are there; whether they’ll ever go away (and stay away);
and whether they may represent predictions, memories, or desires.
Urges: The word “urge” is generally defined as a strong desire. This is a good
example of where a word means something different in an OCD context than
elsewhere. Just as someone may say they have a “chocolate obsession” or a “Star
Wars obsession” and this does not mean they have debilitating unwanted
thoughts about these things, we use the word “urge” to describe something
differently in an OCD context than more generally. I might say I have an urge to

eat when I’m watching a movie and smell popcorn, but it is completely
acceptable for me to have this experience. People with Harm OCD often
describe their intrusive thoughts as “urges” because it’s difficult to find another
word for the marriage of an intrusive thought and a sensation in the body that
seems to indicate an imminent action. If you feel like your hand wants to move
near a knife, you may interpret that as a scary urge to grab the knife and use it for
harm. But this is actually better understood in OCD as a feeling obsession, or an
intrusive feeling, not a genuine urge. You may believe that you must perfectly
distinguish between a thought and an urge, but as you continue with this book,
you will come to understand that this certainty-seeking behavior is a trap.
Compulsions Are…
A compulsion can be understood as any mental or physical attempt to suppress
or neutralize obsessions. They are typically repetitive (they have to be because
they don’t work!) and they stem from a drive to get certainty about your
imagined threats. Sometimes they may appear to only be focused on reducing
anxiety, but usually that anxiety reduction is connected to the belief that the
behavior has proven the OCD wrong. In other words, OCD says something scary
and your compulsive behavior (including mental behavior) says, “No way! Can’t
be!” A compulsion in Harm OCD is anything you do, mentally or otherwise, to
try to convince yourself that you did not, will not, would not, and are not harming
people. A compulsion is viewed as a prerequisite for shifting your attention on to
the next task. The specific actions (and mental behaviors) may vary from case to
case, which we will explore further in part 2 of this book. But here’s a general list
of compulsions you might experience in Harm OCD:
avoiding things, activities, or people that trigger thoughts of harm
engaging in safety behaviors (for example, hiding objects that could
be weapons)
checking to make sure you haven’t harmed or wouldn’t harm yourself
or anyone else
mentally reviewing memories or hypothetical scenarios to assure
yourself that no harm could have been done or can be done

engaging in superstitious behaviors to ensure that no harm will take
place
confessing unwanted harm thoughts
seeking reassurance from others that harm-related thoughts are
acceptable or that harmful acts did not or would not take place
repeatedly researching the difference between OCD and a propensity
to cause harm
The Obsessive-Compulsive Cycle
No book on OCD is complete without a picture and explanation of the
obsessive-compulsive cycle. The graphic below demonstrates the flow of
obsessions to compulsions and back again. A person first experiences an
obsession, which then results in distress (such as anxiety, disgust, or some other
kind of discomfort). Next, the person attempts to reduce that distress by
engaging in a compulsion. For example, you might get an intrusive thought about
harming someone and then reduce anxiety about this thought by repeating the
phrase “I would never harm someone” until you feel better. The problem is, the
moment you feel better, you trigger a process in the brain called negative
reinforcement. Everything we do, we do because it has either been reinforced or
not reinforced. If you go to work, you get paid, and this payment is enjoyed and
sends the message to the brain, “Hey, you should go to work again tomorrow.”
This is called positive reinforcement. You then wake up the next day with an
urge to go get paid. Obsessions are reinforced by the removal of an unwanted
experience (distress), so this process is referred to as negative reinforcement. The
more relief compulsions bring, the more the brain attaches compulsive urges to
unwanted thoughts. So the more you try to reassure yourself about an unwanted
violent thought, the more the brain pushes you to make sure you respond this
way every time you have a violent thought.

Who Has Harm OCD?
In this book, I will use the term “Harm OCD” to describe any manifestation of
OCD where the obsessive theme centers around violent content, though there
may be other ways in which you worry about causing harm (this will be discussed
in chapter 3). Our understanding of how many people struggle with violent
obsessions is still developing. One study suggested that 28% of people with OCD
report violent obsessions (Rasmussen and Eisen 1992). Another suggested that
up to 50% of people with OCD have violent obsessions (Rasmussen and Tsuang
1986). Further, as many as 70% of youth with OCD report having aggressive
obsessions (Storch et al. 2007).
Suffice it to say, violent obsessions in OCD are not some fringe symptom, so
why do we hear so little about them? One reason likely has to do with the nature
of the disorder itself. While the majority of the population has unwanted and
intrusive thoughts, people with OCD are likely to attach special meaning to
them, rather than just assuming they are the spam email of the mind. This leads
to a lot of shame and self-stigma, as well as concerns about being misunderstood
by others. In fact, shame has been found to be particularly high in those with
Harm OCD (Wetterneck, Singh, and Hart 2014). Another reason Harm OCD
gets so little attention is that its sufferers may be less easily portrayed in the
media than those with obvious physical compulsions (such as excessive washing
or checking), so people are not used to “seeing” it.
People with Harm OCD often consider themselves part of the “pure o”
community. What this means is they may see themselves as having obsessions,
but not responding to them by engaging in compulsions. The DSM-V’s first
criterion for OCD is the presence of obsessions, compulsions, or both, but studies

show that people with OCD all experience obsessions and compulsions (Leonard
and Riemann 2012). This confusion may have to do with a misconception that
physical compulsions, such as excessive handwashing, are the only kind of
compulsions. As referenced above, the DSM-V also includes “mental acts” as
part of the definition of compulsions. In fact, mental compulsions and
reassurance seeking are compulsions often associated with these types of
obsessions (Williams et al. 2011). You may have some resistance to the idea that
there’s nothing special about your experience with Harm OCD that sets it aside
from other forms of OCD. Harm-related obsessions can be so torturous that
sometimes even acknowledging that you play a role in them by doing mental
rituals and other compulsions may seem too painful. Further, having intrusive
thoughts that reflect cultural taboos is inherently isolating. It can thus be useful
to connect with others who feel that their obsessions are forbidden (as opposed
to obsessions with more culturally accepted themes, such as concern about germs
or doubt about having locked the door), and this is often done in online
communities under the unfortunately misleading heading “pure o.” Having a
community-building name of any kind can be helpful for reducing the sense of
isolation, but it is important to understand that the types of mental acts people
with Harm OCD engage in are no less identifiable, compulsive, or treatable than
more overt physical rituals.
Why Do We Have Violent Thoughts?
The first thing to remember is that human beings have violent thoughts because
that is a normal thought process to have. This is worth repeating—having
violent thoughts is normal. For most of human existence, our survival has
depended on violence. Today, as we live in more tightly connected communities
with more advanced forms of communicating our needs and desires with one
another, we rely somewhat less on violence to get by. Though you wouldn’t know
it from watching the news (which we easily forget presents us mostly with
unusual occurrences, which is what makes it news!), violence has rather steadily
declined over the last few thousand years. We may actually be living in the most
peaceful time for humanity ever. But it hasn’t always been this way. We come
from violent pasts as a species, from beating each other with clubs over a carcass

to settling an argument with a duel outside the saloon. (See Steven Pinker’s The
Better Angels of Our Nature [2011] for an exploration of this topic.) So violence
in the mind may simply be a relic inherited from our ancestors.
Lee Baer, in his seminal book on “bad” thoughts, Imp of the Mind, discusses
three perspectives on violent thoughts (Baer 2001, 45-51):
Evolutionary theories: that violent thoughts may be an inherited
survival mechanism of old. In other words, we have violence on the
mind because violence has historically been necessary to us as a
species.
Freudian theory: that violent thoughts arise from conflict between
desire and the constraints of society. Freud believed that mental
health conditions arose due to our frustration between the sexual
urges we have at different theoretical stages of development and our
inability to express them in a world of laws and social norms.
The problem of thought suppression: that we make thoughts
intrusive by trying to suppress them. Daniel Wegner’s excellent book
White Bears and Other Unwanted Thoughts (1989) explains the results
of research that shows how efforts to keep thoughts from occurring
actually cause them to increase in your awareness.
You Notice and You Worry That You Noticed
Another way to look at this is that our brains are adept at running potentials.
In other words, they are always calculating whether violence, sex, food, or
anything else might be occurring. Concepts like sex and food don’t always request
our attention at convenient times, either. People with OCD may just be more
likely to notice all of these potentials and attribute meaning to the noticing.
Imagine that all thoughts are available to be had at any time, as if they are just
lying there waiting to be noticed. When you say you are “having” a thought, you
mean that your mind is specifically attending to that thought’s presence. People
with OCD may be attending to a wider variety of thoughts at any give time and
then confusing this problem of attention with the importance of the individual

thought. (See The Mindfulness Workbook for OCD by Hershfield and Corboy
[2013] for further exploration of this concept.)
One study found that people who fear losing control are more likely to become
aware of and upset by intrusive aggressive thoughts when provoked by an
imagined situation of having their goals interfered with. In other words, if I have
a goal and that goal is thwarted, I feel frustrated and this results in the presence
of an aggressive thought. Those without the fear of loss of control are less
burdened by the presence of such thoughts, viewing them as, well, silly. The
study suggested that intrusive harm thoughts are not always just randomly
occurring events, but naturally occurring responses to frustrating situations that
people with OCD are overresponding to (Riskind, Ayers, and Wright 2007).
Why They Are So Persistent
Even if you can get behind the notion that these thoughts pop up for
acceptable reasons, you may still be worried about the fact that they seem so
relentless. Why do they keep coming at you? Cognitive models of OCD credit a
tendency among those with the disorder to evaluate these thoughts in specifically
problematic ways (Purdon 2004):
Overvalued responsibility—thinking that any potential contribution
to harm makes you responsible for all harm that occurs (for example,
thinking you are a murderer if someone gets in a car crash because
they were distracted by the glare off a gum wrapper in the street you
saw but didn’t pick up)
Thought-action fusion—thinking that the quantity of the thought
equals the likelihood of it coming true, or thinking that the presence
of the thought is morally the same as having acted on it (we will
explore this further in chapter 2)
Thought control—believing that failure to fully control thoughts will
lead to failure to control anything (including actions)
Compulsions, as discussed above, reinforce these beliefs, leading to greater
thought intrusion, more of these mistaken appraisals, more compulsions, and so

on.
Thinking Violence Is Not Being Violent
The key thing to remember in all of these explanations is that none of them
point to anything actually being wrong with you, except maybe some tactical
errors in your approach. Violent thoughts are events that occur in the mind, not
bad choices you are making with bad intentions. Understanding that we do not
control what thoughts we are aware of in any given moment allows us to view
thoughts with more freedom and less judgment. Since we can’t pick and choose
our thoughts, we are allowed to observe them in different ways without self-
blame. In other words, we are not required to actually hate all violent thoughts
in order to be nonviolent, moral people.
Consider that violent thoughts can even be exciting and enjoyable for some,
such as the thrill of blowing something up in a video game. Violent thoughts can
also be funny or absurd, such as the scene in the movie Airplane! where
passengers line up to use increasingly unhelpful acts of violence to try to calm a
woman having a panic attack on a plane. Violent thoughts can be creative, such
as movie monsters with different powers to capture their victims in unusual ways.
For example, in A Nightmare on Elm Street, Freddy Krueger is burned to death by
the townsfolk for being a child killer and executes his revenge by haunting the
dreams of the town’s teenagers, using their personal fears as weapons of
execution. Violent thoughts can even be inspirational, as in expressions of
patriotism celebrating the violent overthrow of oppressors (for example, “And the
rockets’ red glare, the bombs bursting in air” in “The Star Spangled Banner”).
Having violent thoughts, unwanted or otherwise, is not an automatic human
failure. It is an automatic human experience, and our feelings about violence can
vary wildly.
People with OCD are probably less likely to commit acts of violence than
anyone else. Considering how prevalent OCD is and the high rate of violent
obsessions within the OCD population, it’s worth pointing out that “there are
virtually no reports in the literature of patients with OCD who act violently,” and
that having obsessions and OCD may even in fact be protective against violent
actions (Booth et al. 2014). Knowing this won’t keep your OCD from accusing
you of being the outlier or making you dwell on the word “virtually” in the last

sentence, but it’s okay to let this knowledge boost your confidence and
willingness to get treated.
Assessing for Harm OCD
OCD can usually be diagnosed with a simple clinical interview by a therapist who
understands obsessions and compulsions and how to identify them. This may
include using a checklist or “scale” that asks about common obsessions and
compulsions, such as the Yale Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale (the YBOCS,
or the child version known as CYBOCS) (Goodman et al. 1989; Scahill et al.
1997). Do you have unwanted intrusive thoughts that cause you distress? Do you
respond to them with time-consuming rituals and avoidance? Does this impair
your quality of life in a meaningful way? Then you probably have OCD.
Assessing Harm OCD is no different from assessing other forms of OCD. The
standard YBOCS-II asks about these “aggressive obsessions” and compulsive
behaviors:
Fear might harm self or others because not careful enough. Examples:
parked car rolling down hill, hit a pedestrian because not paying attention,
customer gets injured because you gave him wrong materials or information.
Fear might harm self on impulse.* Examples: impulsively swallowing poison,
driving car into oncoming traffic, cutting self with nearby knife.
*Distinguish from suicidal intent.
Fear might harm others on impulse.* Examples: physically harming loved
ones, stabbing or poisoning dinner guests, driving car into oncoming traffic,
pushing stranger in front of a train.
*Distinguish from homicidal intent.
Violent, horrific, or repulsive images. Examples: intrusive and disturbing
images of car crashes or disfigured people.*
*Distinguish from PTSD.
Checking that nothing terrible did or will happen. In Harm OCD, this may
include checking to see if someone has any cuts or bruises that you might
have caused somehow, checking the news for evidence of a feared act, or

checking to see if you would commit a violent act or have access to a
weapon.
Need to tell, ask, or confess things. Many people with Harm OCD avoid
talking about their unwanted thoughts for fear of being judged negatively.
But many also repeatedly tell people about their violent thoughts to get
certainty that the other person is informed of any imagined danger or to
reduce guilt about having the thoughts in secret.
Mental rituals (other than checking or counting). Some may repeat prayers
or other statements to neutralize unwanted thoughts. Other mental rituals
may include thought exercises such as running through scenarios where
harm is possible and testing to see how they would feel or analyzing whether
the scenarios could come true. Mentally reviewing past acts to try to get
certainty that no harm was done is another common mental ritual.
Avoiding handling sharp or dangerous objects, or operating vehicles or
machinery, out of concern might harm others. This may also include
avoiding places where harming devices could be found, such as a sporting
goods store.
Avoiding contact with people, children, or animals because of unwanted
impulses.
Avoiding watching TV, listening to the radio, or reading the newspaper to
shield from disturbing information. This may also include avoiding violent
video games or even “aggressive” music that one imagines could produce
dangerous feelings.
(Storch et al. 2010a)
The few compulsions listed above may be the ones most likely to be directly
associated with Harm OCD. However, OCD is not a neatly distinct disorder and
it has a way of working itself into multiple layers of experience. Thus, other
common compulsions, such as repeating behaviors or excessively washing hands
(also asked about on the YBOCS and other assessment scales), could just as
easily be done with the intention to ward off unwanted violent thoughts.
Similarly, other obsessions, such as moral or religious fears, can occupy the same

mental space as Harm OCD if you believe it to be morally wrong or sinful to
have a violent thought. It can be helpful to remember that assessment tools (and
the clinicians who administer and analyze them) ask a wide array of questions to
form a three-dimensional picture of your OCD. So don’t be confused if you
identify with one area of OCD and not another, or if you identify with many
areas of OCD. This says nothing about your prognosis or severity. It just provides
information about how to tailor treatment specifically to you.
The Scary World of Extreme Checking
No, it’s not a new sports craze. What I mean by “extreme checking” is when
desperation and compulsion collide to cause behaviors that could be potentially
harmful despite not including any actual intention to cause harm. For example, a
person terribly afraid of harming his infant daughter might gently hold a pillow
over the baby’s face thinking it would prove he won’t try to suffocate her. This is
a bad idea on multiple levels. First, and most obviously, it could cause harm by
accident. Second, it doesn’t prove anything other than that he is afraid of causing
harm, which he already knew. The message that he is a danger to his child is
actually enhanced by efforts to prove that he is not. Consider what happens when
you take the bait in any argument. You can’t help but concede that there is a
debate worth having when you go on the defensive. If I say I have a pet unicorn
and you say “Oh really, where do you keep it?” then you give me an opportunity
to talk to you about my pet unicorn like it’s real. If instead you simply let me
make my claim and refuse to dignify it with a counterclaim, I will be left hanging
with my own ridiculousness.
Compulsions always prime the pump for stronger obsessions. Extreme checking
behaviors have the (very high) potential to become their own triggers once you
realize you used someone you care about as a guinea pig in a behavioral
experiment and start to obsess over whether or not you went too far. In short,
checking is a compulsion and compulsions never work. Extreme checking
behaviors create even more problems. If you find yourself engaging in such
behaviors, remember that it doesn’t mean you are a bad person or that you are
more likely to cause harm, but it does mean you need to take the severity of your
OCD more seriously.

Reassurance Seeking Never Works
Of all of the compulsions you may engage in to try to escape these unwanted
thoughts, reassurance seeking may be the most insidious. The first time you ask
someone to tell you that you won’t act on your thoughts, it may feel like a
satisfying rush of relief when they tell you there’s no way you’ll do it. But this
rush doesn’t last longer than any other kind of high, and the OCD quickly pokes
holes in the reassurance. How do they know what I will or won’t do? What if they
don’t really understand what I meant when I shared these thoughts? What if they’re just
telling me what I want to hear? How can they say I won’t hurt anyone when they don’t
know this new thought I just had? The more you ask, the more aggressive the OCD
gets, the more you think you need the reassurance just to feel stable for a
moment. Reassurance seeking never works. You get burned either way. You either
get the answer you want, which validates and strengthens the OCD, or you don’t
get the answer you want, which terrifies you and again validates and strengthens
the OCD. Bringing the Internet into the equation by googling your thoughts and
trying to make your own differential diagnosis makes everything worse.
Differential Diagnosis
Picking up this book with the word “Harm” in the title may have been a scary
endeavor. Admitting to yourself that you have unwanted intrusive thoughts of a
violent nature is hard enough, but to allow yourself to be seen or heard by others
admitting this may take your anxiety to another level. Every act of defiance
against OCD is worth celebrating, so give yourself a tip of the hat for getting
here.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder is a clever little beast because one of its
hallmark traits is to make you question whether or not you have it. The
underlying fear is that these unwanted thoughts have some kind of special
meaning, either that they are predictive of an unwanted future act or that they
say something unacceptable about your identity. So naturally you will want to
know that the problem is OCD and not something more nefarious. OCD is not
difficult to assess. For starters, we could simply ask if these intrusive thoughts are
unwanted and distressing. But the truth about mental health is that people don’t
always fit nicely into little categories determined by the American Psychiatric

Association. People have the criteria for one disorder, but may have other
disorders (disturbingly referred to as “co-morbid” disorders) or other influencing
factors in their mood, environment, or physical health that impact whether they
may have obsessions and compulsions.
To get the proper treatment for OCD, you need to get an accurate diagnosis
from a professional trained in treating OCD. Someone with no experience
treating OCD may not know what questions to ask that can help you articulate
your experience well. This stuff is hard to talk about and if you, the thinker, are
confused, then adding a confused clinician to the mix may make things worse.
Self-diagnosis, especially regarding unwanted harm thoughts, is also particularly
unreliable and I would recommend generally avoiding any online “tests” for
Harm OCD. The person analyzing the test data (you) may be suffering from
OCD and the OCD is biased against you.
What Isn’t Harm OCD? a.k.a. the Scariest Few
Paragraphs in This Book
As mentioned above, there are many ways that violent thoughts can show up
in the mind that are not necessarily OCD. This is a scary thing to consider if your
OCD is telling you that you may cause harm. Some people have OCD and that’s
that. Some people have OCD that is being affected or mediated by something
that isn’t OCD. Some people have symptoms that may look like OCD but aren’t.
And some people may have OCD as well as another disorder that is not OCD, or
a symptom that is not typically found in OCD. So if Harm OCD means having
obsessive thoughts of violence, then what isn’t Harm OCD?
Genuine desire to cause harm: I know, “How do I know if my
thoughts are a genuine desire or not?” Well, the fact that you are so
unclear about it points to OCD. People who have a genuine desire to
cause harm to self or others may or may not enjoy their thoughts
about harm, but they view them as lining up well with their preferred
or historic identity. This is sometimes referred to as “ego syntonic,”
which means that the thoughts make sense to the thinkers given the
context of how the thinkers view themselves in the world. One of the
things that makes your harm thoughts so upsetting is that they are

ego dystonic, meaning they do not line up well with your preferred or
historic identity. Why would I, of all people, be thinking such horrible
things? This is an OCD sufferer’s question. People with antisocial
personality disorder, for example, demonstrate a pervasive disregard
for the rights of others and this has nothing to do with Harm OCD.
People with impulse control disorders and related disorders: Some
people commit acts of harm because they have a problem in the brain
that fails to inhibit them from responding to impulses. In Harm
OCD, where the concern is about causing harm impulsively, this
concept is terrifying. People who have a history of committing brief
and random violent acts in response to sudden bursts of aggression
are not Harm OCD sufferers. While they may feel badly afterwards,
they do not typically have a history of worrying about the behavior
prior to the event. The event is unexpected, spontaneous, and
unanticipated. Many people with Harm OCD worry about impulses
turning into actions and interpret them as warnings that an action is
about to occur, but this is best understood as an unwanted, intrusive
sensation. In the book Overcoming Unwanted Intrusive Thoughts, the
authors describe “a whoosh of fear” that coincides with struggling
against intrusive thoughts and point out that this often gets confused
with impulses. However, people with impulse control disorders “‘act
first and think later’ whereas you are an ‘over-thinker’” (Winston and
Seif 2017, 16).
Personality disorders: Some mental health challenges are
understood as a series of rigid character traits and patterns of
behavior, such as instability in relationships, excessive dependence on
or avoidance of others, or intermittent bursts of anger. In some cases,
people with personality disorders may become so emotionally
overheated that they experience urges to engage in violent acts or
acts of self-harm (cutting, for example). The thoughts preceding
these acts may bring relief, as opposed to the distress typically
experienced with an obsessive fear of violent thoughts.

Severe depression with suicidality: If you obsess about thoughts
related to suicide, your biggest fear is that you might impulsively
choose to end your life. This is fundamentally different from people
who genuinely desire not to live because they are so severely
depressed and don’t want the experience to persist any longer. People
with OCD do sometimes struggle with what is called suicidal
ideation, which is simply a desire to die. It can be passive (that is, it
does not include a plan) or active (that is, it includes a plan and
intent). This is different from obsessively fearing self-harm. In major
depressive disorders, it is not intrusive suicidal thoughts that cause
distress, but the symptoms of low mood, fatigue, and hopelessness
that can lead to suicidal ideation. Suicidal thoughts may be viewed
favorably as an escape from depression or as a way to stop being the
“burden” to others that they imagine themselves being. A trained
professional can help assess whether there is a safety concern
including intent, means, or a plan for suicide.
Bipolar disorder: Some people suffer from a mood disorder that
involves cycles of depressed mood and episodes of “mania.” Manic
episodes often include periods of impulsivity, insomnia, hyperactivity,
and sometimes obsessive thoughts and compulsive behaviors. If harm
thoughts are occurring only during manic episodes, then bipolar
disorder may be a more useful diagnosis because the treatments for
that disorder may alleviate the temporary symptoms that look like
OCD.
Psychotic symptoms: Psychosis is probably the scariest word in the
English language for people with Harm OCD. No matter how
carefully I choose my words here, some readers are going to get
reassured and others are going to get triggered. Neither are more
likely than the other to be psychotic.
Psychosis is a term that loosely means an inability to distinguish
between what is real and what is not. Naturally, people with OCD
all struggle with some confusion over whether something is real,
important, or true, but this in no way makes them psychotic.

Psychotic features of the mind typically include delusions (very
firmly fixed beliefs about things that are untrue or impossible) or
hallucinations (visual or aural experiences occurring in the mind
that are viewed as coming from outside the mind). In psychotic
disorders, it is not the thought itself of harm that causes distress,
but these delusions and hallucinations. Further, in psychosis there
is an abnormally low willingness to accept further evidence about a
belief. Note how this differs from OCD, where one is excessively
seeking out evidence to prove that harming thoughts are not true.
People with Harm OCD are typically not struggling with
psychotic features, but often worry that they are. On occasion,
people with OCD who may have extremely low insight or absent
insight (meaning, they view their fearful thoughts as reasonable but
in some way still unwanted and intrusive) may cross over from
obsession to delusional beliefs about the likelihood of losing
control. At the higher end of severity of OCD with extremely low
insight, this can be difficult to assess (especially to self-assess), so a
thorough psychiatric evaluation can be helpful in these cases. If
your treatment provider brings up psychotic features or
antipsychotic medication, this does not automatically mean you
are schizophrenic, nor that you have another psychotic disorder. It
is important to remember that having some of these features does
not mean you don’t have OCD and does not mean you are actually
going to harm anyone. It simply means that there may be
additional psychiatric and therapeutic strategies for addressing your
OCD and getting that insight back on track.
If you relate to any of the statements above, that doesn’t mean that you don’t
also have OCD or that you are doomed to some unwanted diagnosis. The point
of considering these challenges is to understand that it is wise to go into detail
with a professional and to collaborate with that professional to obtain the best
understanding of your symptoms so you can choose the best therapeutic
approach. You may disclose a thought or an experience that at first sounds like a
personality disorder or suicidality or psychosis of some kind, but then through

careful back-and-forth with the clinician you may both conclude that this is not
the case. It is important to give yourself and the clinician time to explore how
you experience and relate to the thoughts, not just what the thoughts are.
Too many people get misdiagnosed either because they are seeing an untrained
clinician or they are not articulating their symptoms in a way that allows the
clinician to understand what is going on. This can unfortunately lead to
nightmarish scenarios wherein people are unnecessarily hospitalized or
erroneously reported to an authority as a safety concern. But it is also true that
underdiagnosing can lead to other problems, and not just problems of harm. For
example, people doing their best to fight OCD who don’t know that they are
bipolar may be doing everything right, but still find themselves going back to
square one every few weeks or months and thinking that they are a failure when
in fact they are simply having a manic episode that is causing a flareup of
obsessive symptoms. Ultimately, what’s important is that things that are not OCD
have been ruled out or identified so that OCD treatment can move forward at its
most effective.
Okay, so that was uncomfortable. You’re uncomfortable reading about all the
ways you could potentially not have OCD or also have some problem you don’t
want. I’m uncomfortable because I just wrote all the reasons people are probably
going to email me reassurance-seeking questions or be upset with me for
triggering their worst fears. Now that we’ve both acknowledged our discomfort,
let’s move forward.
You’re Not Crazy
I’m going to remind you of this throughout the book. “Crazy” is a nonsense
word we use to put ourselves down when we don’t like what we see in the
mind. You have a common, diagnosable, treatable disorder. This disorder
necessarily involves obsessions, and the content of your obsessions happens
to focus on issues related to harm. You view these issues as contaminants of
the mind and use compulsions to clean them from your mind. The problem
is that this doesn’t work. The more you mentally wash, the dirtier your brain
thinks you are. This process of negative reinforcement is actually the
opposite of crazy. You should be more likely to repeat things that are

reinforced and it’s normal to seek out behaviors you think will reduce your
pain. “Disorder” simply means out of order, where the behaviors have
become so excessive that they cause more problems. We look at these issues
as mental health issues because we have reason to believe that features of
the brain may make you more likely to find unwanted thoughts less
tolerable, to feel alarmed by their presence, and to overthink that alarm.
Understanding these predispositions is an important first step in
understanding how to overcome them.
Recap
Okay, one chapter down and you’re still here. You did a great job taking in a lot
of technical psychology concepts, some of which might have been really
triggering. Don’t worry if it didn’t immediately click for you. I just want to set a
sturdy platform here so we can build on it as we look deeper into how to
overcome your Harm OCD. So what was chapter 1 all about? OCD is a common
and treatable mental health condition characterized by obsessions and
compulsions. Obsessions are unwanted intrusive thoughts, feelings, and
sensations. Compulsions are physical or mental behaviors aimed at reducing
anxiety about these intrusions. A significant number of people with OCD have
obsessions related to the fear of harming self or others and having unwanted
violent thoughts. Why we have violent thoughts (and why we notice them) are
not easy questions to answer since there may be evolutionary/biological,
psychological, or behavioral reasons for them arising. But whatever may precede
them, simply having violent thoughts is a normal part of the human experience.
There are, however, other mental health conditions that can sometimes be
associated with violent thoughts, so getting a proper assessment and diagnosis is
important. Now let’s take a look at what tools you can use to overcome your
Harm OCD.

CHAPTER 2
Tools and Techniques
No doubt you’ve been working hard trying to get rid of your unwanted violent
thoughts. This hard work hasn’t paid off, so you came here. Now you find
yourself considering another kind of hard work. If you’re scared that the tools that
lie ahead won’t do the trick, that’s perfectly normal. It’s okay to go at your own
pace, and if you want to just read this chapter like it’s a textbook without
thinking too hard about actually using these tools yourself, that’s okay too. I’m
going to go over four basic OCD-fighting tools in general terms here, then in part
2 I’ll show in more detail how they can be applied to specific Harm OCD
manifestations.
Uncertainty Acceptance and Harm OCD
Pick up any book on OCD and it will tell you that thoughts are just thoughts and
you don’t need to worry about what they mean, because they don’t inherently
mean anything. This reassuring (and true) statement may still not be particularly
satisfying. The disorder makes it difficult to sit with the discomfort of letting a
thought simply be a thought when it feels like it could be a threat of harm. In the
previous chapter, I mentioned how defending yourself in an argument against
OCD validates OCD’s claim that an argument is worth having. If in the presence
of an unwanted violent thought you repeatedly state to yourself, “It’s just a
thought, it’s just a thought, it’s just a thought…” then you are simultaneously
admitting that OCD’s claim (that it is more than a thought) is worth disproving.
To overcome this, you need to enhance your willingness to accept uncertainty
about the thought. In other words, you have to remain open to the idea that the
thought may be something more than a thought, and that you are simply
choosing not to do much about it.

Plead the Fifth
When you have Harm OCD, it can often feel like you’re repeatedly being
accused of a terrible crime. OCD is your accuser, but it also acts like a high-
powered defense attorney who says, “Look, I can get you a not-guilty plea,
guaranteed. I’m going to get all the witnesses and all the evidence and bring it all
up in your trial and if you stick with me, the jury will acquit you. 100%.” You
hear this and think, Great, let’s do this. I know I’m not guilty, let’s make sure it’s
official. Then the OCD says, “Sure thing. By the way, I cost $1000/hour, I bill 24
hours a day, and the case will take a few years, maybe more. In the end, you’ll get
your not-guilty verdict, probably, but I should tell you, the long trial will decimate
you and the verdict might not make much of a difference. But never mind that,
let’s get to that evidence of your innocence.”
An OCD therapist like me is no high-powered attorney. I’m more like a pubic
defender and my advice is simple: Plead the fifth. In an American court, when
you plead the fifth amendment to the U.S. constitution, you are saying that you
will not answer a question that could incriminate you. In other words, no matter
what the OCD asks, just don’t answer. You’re probably thinking, “No, that makes
me look really guilty.” Then I explain, “If you don’t take the bait and answer
OCD’s questions, this thing will go to mistrial in a week. No one will remember
it. It might as well have been just a forgettable fluke.” This approach is what it
means to accept uncertainty, and it is indeed scary. It doesn’t come with that
shiny promise of complete vindication. But it also doesn’t cost you a lifetime of
obsessing. Accepting uncertainty about your violent thoughts means allowing the
possibility that they could be true by not trying to prove otherwise.
But what if? you say. What if this thought means something about me? What if this
thought is a sign of future behavior? What if I wanted it or will act on it? Jonathan
Grayson, in his influential book Freedom from Obsessive Compulsive Disorder,
argues that “the core of OCD is trying to get rid of uncertainty in our lives in an
attempt to be 100% certain” (2003, 8). The questions above feel like they must
be answered and yet none of them could possibly ever be answered with 100%
certainty. They are, by definition, ideas about potential. Part of the cruelty of
Harm OCD is this internal demand to know perfectly something that could
never be known—what will happen in the future (will I hurt someone?), what

were my intentions (did I want to cause harm?), and what does this actually
mean (do these thoughts make me capable of harm?)?
Unhelpful Ideas About Uncertainty Acceptance
You may be asking yourself: How can I accept uncertainty about a thought such as
stabbing myself or pushing a loved one over a railing? Wouldn’t that make me some kind
of a monster or at the very least reduce me to being miserable in the knowledge that my
fears could be true? The answer to these questions is surprisingly simple: No.
Accepting uncertainty is not accepting defeat. Accepting uncertainty is a power
position. It says, “I need no defense and my feet are planted in such a way that
no gust of wind can knock me down.” So why is uncertainty acceptance so hard?
MISTAKEN BELIEF 1: UNCERTAINTY MEANS FIFTY-FIFTY
Obsessions often begin with the words “What if” and follow with some
description of an event the thinker finds intolerable. What if I snap and harm a
loved one? What if I am a closeted sociopath? What if I just jump off the roof?
Compulsions are designed to increase certainty about these unwanted outcomes.
Using the above examples, a person might avoid being alone with a triggering
loved one, spend hours researching the term “sociopath” on the Internet, or
ruminate over reasons why he or she would never jump from a building. Since
these compulsive efforts never really work in the end, you are still left with only
one option—accepting uncertainty that the feared concept could be true. But
accepting uncertainty does not mean accepting that there is a “one out of two”
shot that your fear could be true. The odds of a random person spontaneously
snapping or losing his or her identity are of course very low. The odds of the
ceiling falling on my head as I write this are also very low. Nonetheless, the odds
are higher than zero. Surely getting up on this chair and pushing on the ceiling to
make sure it’s secure would be a strange use of my time. Yet ceilings can and do
collapse. So what I have to do in order to finish this sentence is admit that a
calculation could be done and I am simply choosing not to do it. This doesn’t
suddenly mean that the ceiling is either going to fall or not fall at the flip of a
coin or that I should sit here thinking that my life is on the line. It means that I
am letting myself behave in a manner consistent with the odds being very low.

MISTAKEN BELIEF 2: THERE ARE THINGS WE CANNOT
ACCEPT UNCERTAINTY ABOUT
You may assume, Sure, I can be uncertain if my hands are clean, but how can I live
without being certain that I’m not going to murder someone? This belief betrays a
poor understanding of the nature of certainty and how it differs from confidence.
Mostly, we use the word certainty interchangeably with the word confidence.
Confidence is a feeling. It is a sense that, given certain conditions, certain
experiences are predictable. As I sit in this chair, I feel certain that it will support
my weight, but in fact I am not certain. I am confident. Embracing this difference
between the feeling of confidence and the fantasy state of certainty is easy when
the consequences seem tolerable. Worst-case scenario, the chair beneath me
crumbles and I have a good “How I got that butt bruise” story. But envisioning a
world in which you somehow cope with the outcomes of your violent fears
coming true is not so easy. This gets translated as a reason to commit to
compulsive behavior because you feel you simply have to, because there appears
to be no way uncertainty about this issue could be tolerated.
The problem is, certainty still doesn’t exist. OCD doesn’t care how brutal the
content of the thoughts are. Certainty remains a constant. Only confidence
exists and compulsions are the very thing that deplete confidence. Compulsions
send the message to the brain: “Warning: confidence is lacking.” We must accept
uncertainty about all things, not because all things are likely or even worth any
attention at all, but because we have no alternative. When confidence is absent,
we can find it by choosing the behaviors confident people choose (for example,
not paying much attention to our unwanted thoughts and instead engaging with
life in the present).
MISTAKEN BELIEF 3: PEOPLE WITH OCD ARE NOT AS
GOOD AT ACCEPTING UNCERTAINTY
You may struggle to tolerate uncertainty about your harm thoughts, but this
does not mean you have a general deficit in the area of uncertainty tolerance.
Because OCD sufferers often see things in finer detail and become aware of what
others might consider “fringe” thoughts that don’t typically demand attention,
they may feel like they experience more ideas that require one to be uncertain
about. In other words, OCD sufferers are spending significantly more time

actively and consciously accepting uncertainty, and doing it well, than people
who aren’t even noticing the things we have to accept uncertainty about. It is
only when the focus of attention is on a particular obsession that people with
OCD struggle to accept uncertainty.
It is not unusual for a client to come to my office to work on a fear of stabbing
because he struggles to cope with the uncertainty that he could harm someone or
harm himself if he held a knife. But how did he get to my office? Presumably he
drove a metal death cage on wheels at sixty miles per hour surrounded by others
(of unknown levels of driving skill) doing the same thing. So accepting serious
life-or-death uncertainties is not the problem. Accepting uncertainty about your
obsession is the problem. OCD sufferers are actually uncertainty-accepting pros.
You notice what others don’t and you allow things to be as they are more often
than not. The trick is learning how to generalize this skill to apply to your
specific obsessions, instead of only to the plethora of other thoughts on the radar.
MISTAKEN BELIEF 4: ACCEPTING UNCERTAINTY MEANS
YOU CAN’T ASSUME THE BEST
There is a myth that OCD promotes in the mind that you don’t deserve to be
happy; that if you’re happy, it must be the result of not paying enough attention
to something important. So if you try to do what happy people do, you may feel
an urge to neutralize that with self-criticism or self-punishment of some kind.
Accepting uncertainty is not a mandate to assume the worst and then dwell on
it. Rather than it having to be a net negative experience, it can be a freeing one.
If you assume that your fears are untrue and engage in behaviors that reflect this,
it still leaves space for the possibility that you are wrong.
Accepting uncertainty can mean living joyfully with the assumption that your
fears are not true, that your OCD is a glitch at best, or a liar and bully at its
worst. If you have a thought about pushing a stranger in front of a bus and you
walk right by that stranger with a smile and resist the urge to look back to make
sure you haven’t harmed him, then this is living as if your thoughts are nonsense.
If you have a thought about poisoning yourself for no reason and you say, “Well,
that’s interesting” and then leave a bottle of bleach sitting out in the laundry
room, then again, this is living with the assumption that your fears are not true.
This is not because you reassured yourself or proved anything, but because you’ve

chosen a behavioral path consistent with a healthy assumption instead of a
compulsive one.
Now that we’ve looked at some ideas that get in the way of uncertainty
acceptance, let’s take a look at the tools that enhance your uncertainty
acceptance skills.
Cognitive Approaches
The first tool we can use to accept uncertainty and resist compulsions is
examining the way we are thinking about the things that trigger us. If we
understand that compulsions are the problem, then it would seem that treating
OCD is really simple—choose not to do compulsions. But even when you
understand the voluntary nature of a compulsion, it really doesn’t seem that way
at the time. One reason may be the way you are thinking at the time you get
triggered—not what you are thinking, but how. As you approach a triggering
situation (that is, an obsession is brought on), you may have every intention to
resist compulsions, but something in the way you are thinking about the situation
pushes you over the edge and seems to remove choice from the equation. This
way of thinking is called a cognitive distortion.
Common Cognitive Distortions in Harm OCD
Cognitive distortions are thoughts or ways of thinking that cause us to perceive
reality inaccurately (Burns 1989). In the context of OCD, these bent lenses of
the mind trick us into overestimating the risks and responsibilities we associate
with our unwanted thoughts. Let’s take a look at just some of the thinking errors
you are most likely to encounter in your fight against Harm OCD. This is by no
means an official list of all of the possible cognitive distortions, just a small
handful that may stand out especially in Harm OCD.
Thought-Action Fusion (TAF): This means believing that the presence of a
thought either changes the likelihood of the thought becoming true (probability
TAF) or that having a thought is, in and of itself, equivalent to an immoral bad
act (morality TAF) (Rachman and Shafran 1999). You could say that all Harm
OCD is a problem of thought-action fusion. After all, if you didn’t hold the
mistaken belief that your violent thoughts are going to bring about a danger to

self or others or that your violent thoughts were a threat to your moral identity,
you wouldn’t think of yourself as having violent obsessions in the first place. If
you struggle with probability TAF, you may feel that you have to do compulsions
to avoid the guilt that arises when you consider you may have harmed or be
about to harm someone. If you struggle with morality TAF, you may feel that you
have to do compulsions to escape the shame of negative self-judgment that
comes with believing you are a bad person for having bad thoughts. Both may be
in play. Being able to recognize when your compulsive behavior is being driven by
the mere presence of your violent thoughts can help you step back and
remember: Thoughts and actions are not the same thing.
Catastrophizing: This means predicting a negative future and assuming you can’t
cope with it. Understanding catastrophizing in the context of Harm OCD can be
tricky. Of course what you’re thinking is catastrophic, and of course coping with
it seems impossible! The thing to understand about this way of thinking is simply
that we cannot predict the future. This does not mean we have to assume the
future is bad, or even that there is a fifty-fifty chance that it will be bad (recall
the discussion on uncertainty from earlier in this chapter). What it means is that
when we allow OCD to trick us into thinking we know something about the
future, it makes it easier for OCD to bully us into doing compulsions. Further,
because we cannot predict the future, we also do not know how our fears coming
true will actually affect us, and thus we do not know how we will cope. People
often derive great strength from tragic and humbling circumstances. So when we
recognize that we are predicting the future, we can note that, step back, and
reintroduce choice to the equation.
Discounting the Positive: The universe is already constantly providing you with
evidence that you and your thoughts are not dangerous. You likely have a long
history of not causing harm, which is, in part, why you find it so disturbing to
have these harming thoughts at all. But when the thought occurs that you’ve had
all these violent thoughts during all this time and still you haven’t laid hands on
anyone, you discount it, you push it away. You do it with “oh but this time”
thinking. The hundred other times you ate with a knife and fork and nobody got
hurt mean nothing to you. It’s this time that you’re worried about. It’s always this

time. Being able to notice this “oh but this time” thinking can be a useful way to
remember to resist compulsions.
Tunnel Vision: The inverse of discounting the positive can be seen here. With
one hand you push away fundamentally reassuring information that your life
history indicates no violent intent and with the other you collect evidence to
support the OCD theory that you are a harm to self or others. Tunnel vision is a
way of thinking in which you pull in information from your surroundings to
support the obsession and lose sight of the fact that what you are noticing in your
surroundings is being noticed simply because, well, that’s your thing. You are
likely not only to notice things related to your harm obsessions, but also to notice
that you noticed it. It’s at this moment that the OCD says, “See? You noticed that
thought/knife/person/etc. because you’re gonna do something bad!” When we
are obsessed, we are stuck in a tunnel with our obsessions and we see little else
outside that tunnel.
Emotional Reasoning: This way of thinking occurs when we use feelings as the
primary evidence for a belief. For example, you might feel anxious when you’re
around your child and conclude, “Because I feel anxious, this must be a sign that
I am going to harm her.” The problem with using feelings as primary evidence is
that feelings are unreliable. You may feel anxious for a lot of reasons, including
no reason. Similarly, you may feel guilty and let this experience drive you to
review your past to see if you’ve harmed anyone. But you have OCD, so you feel
guilty a lot, often without knowing why. If we let our emotions determine when
we do or do not do compulsions, we invite the OCD to manipulate our emotions
to get us to do compulsions. It’s not that we should avoid or ignore all of our
feelings all of the time, but we get a competitive edge over OCD when we choose
not to let emotions be the primary reason for engaging in behaviors.
Shoulds: The word “should” usually represents some useful guideline. You
probably should wash your hands after using the toilet. This is a generally
accepted practice and applies pretty equally to all of us (except if you are doing
exposure therapy for a fear of unclean hands). Okay, so what if you use the toilet
and then learn that there is a bomb in the building? Should you wash your hands
or deprioritize hygiene just for now? This may seem like a goofy analogy, but quite
often in OCD, “should” statements become so rigid that you can find yourself

rationalizing compulsive behavior to the exclusion of significantly more
important things. If you are carrying around a thought process like I should never
have violent thoughts and then you become aware of a violent thought, you may
feel the urge to drop whatever you were doing before the thought popped up and
start ritualizing. But what you were doing may have been important. Anything you
are doing in reality is objectively more important than what you are doing in your
head. Recognizing when you are using should statements as a justification for
compulsions can be a useful tool in catching and abandoning those compulsions.
Cognitive approaches to OCD are about learning a language to help you
understand how the OCD is trying to communicate its demand for compulsions.
Like any language, you’ll have many words that mean the same or similar things.
But being able to call your thinking by any term is a step toward positioning
yourself as an observer instead of a victim. From that position, you can challenge
OCD’s claim that you must do compulsions.
Cognitive Restructuring
Challenging OCD on the cognitive level can be delicate work. The more we
engage with the content of our thoughts, the easier it is to fall for the trap of
believing it’s all about content. However, if you can recognize that your thinking
is distorted, then you can ask what it would look like without that distortion.
What you’re doing is deconstructing the faulty thinking and reorganizing it as
rational thinking. This approach is called cognitive restructuring. It’s important
to remember here that we are not using cognitive restructuring to challenge the
probability of your thoughts being true. That just feeds into the OCD by
validating its false claims as worth arguing over. Instead, we use restructuring to
reach an objective viewpoint by challenging “overvalued beliefs about
responsibility, about the meaning and importance of thought, and about the
meaning of thought control” (Purdon 2004, 1174).
In other words, we are choosing to sit with uncertainty because we are not
confused about having to do something different. Mostly this means admitting
what we don’t know. As one example, consider the difference between saying to
yourself that you must do a compulsion because if you don’t, someone will get
hurt, and simply saying to yourself that you can’t predict the future, but in your

experience, compulsions make your life worse. In part 2 of this book, I’ll show
you tips for challenging distorted thinking in specific Harm OCD manifestations.
Exposure and Response Prevention (ERP)
One of my favorite movies is the 1986 remake of The Fly. If you tell a woman
you’re breaking up with her because you’re turning into a giant mutant fly and
are afraid you’ll harm her if she sticks around anyway, well, that’s true love. The
tagline on the poster for this movie says, “Be Afraid. Be Very Afraid.” My
recommendation for treating your OCD is to be afraid, but just be, er, kinda
afraid. Exposure and response prevention (ERP) is not just some torture game
invented by twisted therapists to make your life worse. It can be a very effective
tool in the treatment of harm obsessions (Abramowitz et al. 2003a). Gradually
confronting the things you are afraid of while resisting the urge to do negatively
reinforcing rituals is how you break the obsessive-compulsive cycle. Only through
that can we learn to accept, or even embrace, uncertainty, and only then can we
find peace in the mind. But how do we get good at catching and resisting
compulsions? In the few pages that preceded this, we looked at ways in which we
get tricked by distorted thinking into forgetting that compulsions are voluntary.
Here we will look at how to practice resisting compulsions by bringing up the
urge to do them and facing them down instead of giving in.
Habituation and Inhibitory Learning
What do we mean when we say ERP works? What exactly is working and how
is it different from, well, not working? Our current understanding of what
happens when we confront our scary thoughts and uncomfortable feelings can be
divided into two categories: feeling better and getting better at feeling.
FEELING BETTER—HABITUATION
Having Harm OCD is like having a horror movie playing in the cinema of your
head on repeat. To make matters worse, if you try not to think of it or you try to
shut it off, its persistence only becomes more upsetting. However, if you watch
the same horror movie enough times and really stay with it, you may stop feeling
afraid over time. You may feel bored as your brain starts to respond to the

imagery with, Oh, that again. This process is called habituation, which is another
way of saying that your brain gets so used to you disregarding the alarm that it
pulls the plug on it. Consider that feeling anxious and upset takes energy and you
have a limited supply of this. Your brain delivers this energy in order to push you
to avoid being harmed by whatever is threatening you. Your brain can learn to
stop providing you energy for this purpose if it appears to be going to no use. In
short, habituation is feeling less fear in the presence of the same trigger.
GETTING BETTER AT FEELING—INHIBITORY LEARNING
Focusing exclusively on habituation (getting rid of fear) can result in
developing an unhealthy aversion to fear itself, leading to the erroneous
conclusion that if you don’t habituate in ERP, you have failed (Jacoby and
Abramowitz 2016). Some horror movies just have a way of getting under our
skin. No matter how many times we watch them, they still make us cringe. This
is done by design, not by accident. Interestingly enough, this is one of the reasons
an avid horror enthusiast might give for identifying this as a great movie. “A
hundred viewings and it still makes me freaked out!” In this case, what happens
is the fear stops being an indicator of something bad (a hundred times the fear
came up and a hundred times nothing happened) and starts being something
that is simply experienced in the context that it is in.
Put differently, the first time you see something scary, you learn a fear response.
People with OCD get locked in to this response and begin to believe that the fear
is fundamentally intolerable; so even when you do ERP, you may habituate for a
while (get away from feeling fear) only to find yourself afraid again down the
road. Still, ERP seems to work in the sense that when people commit to it, their
lives become less burdened by OCD. The reason for this is that ERP causes the
brain to learn to inhibit the fear response and allow other responses to also take
place (Craske et al. 2008). So people who watch horror films multiple times may
continue to notice the scary bits (the fear response), but their attention to this
competes with everything else they begin to notice, such as the makeup effects,
the set design, the acting, the music, and both the absence of being harmed and
the belief that the fear is tolerable. So you may spit out your popcorn at the
movies when the monster jumps into the frame, but your drive to leave the

cinema and run for safety is inhibited. Your brain says, Yeah, it’s really scary, just
roll with it anyway. This phenomenon is called inhibitory learning.
Stepping away from the movie metaphor, let’s review these two concepts above
in Harm OCD terms. Imagine your Harm OCD tells you that it is not safe to be
around a kitchen knife and a loved one at the same time. You have an obsessive
fear that under these conditions you may “snap” and stab your loved one. This
idea causes you a great amount of discomfort and makes being in the kitchen
with your loved one extremely fear-inducing. ERP would involve exposing
yourself to those conditions while resisting compulsions (which might include
hiding or avoiding the knife, seeking reassurance about whether or not you could
snap, mentally checking to see if you would or wouldn’t snap, and so on).
Exposure might include anything from looking at a picture of a knife or writing a
story about harming someone with a knife, all the way up to standing in the
kitchen holding the knife close to your loved one. For ERP to be effective, this
has to be done in the absence of compulsions, with the focus on accepting
uncertainty, not disproving your fears. Over time, you may habituate to the
conditions (feel better, find the whole thing silly and easily tolerated) and/or you
may inhibit your fear response by associating the experience with cooking, shared
experiences with your loved one, and the belief that the fear is tolerable (and
worth it).
Different Ways to Do ERP
The pain and sense of isolation that may come with your unwanted violent
thoughts may leave you assuming that your obsession doesn’t lend itself to ERP.
You may have even had a therapist with little or no training in OCD treatment
tell you that exposure won’t work with violent obsessions: “How will you do it?
We can’t risk you hurting yourself or others!” This couldn’t be further from the
truth. In fact, because so much of Harm OCD resides in the mind (you may be
afraid of sharp objects, but you’re also afraid of your thoughts), there are actually
many different ways to do effective exposure for harm fears. Some Harm OCD
exposures can be done in vivo (exposing yourself to real-life situations and
triggers) and some can be done as imaginal exposures (creating stories about
feared events). For any exposure, it is important to stay within the following
three rules:

Don’t do exposure in a manner where accidental harm is likely to
take place. Remember, the purpose of exposure is to challenge the
distorted belief that you are incapable of tolerating uncertainty about
your harm-related thoughts and feelings. There is no reason ERP
should include risk-taking behaviors that fall outside of generally
understood safety principles. In other words, we don’t expose to a fear
of causing a car accident by driving blindfolded or intoxicated. We do
take the risk of driving, with a seatbelt, at a reasonable speed, and
with our disturbing thoughts, but without compulsions.
You don’t have to violate your values in the name of ERP. Nothing
about ERP demands that you violate your personal moral or ethical
code. Your OCD may make you feel doubtful about that code and its
integrity, so this is understandably scary to consider. But the point is
that ERP does not ask you to harm anyone or engage in any
particular behavior you believe to be inherently wrong. When doing
ERP, you might want to ask yourself whether the feeling of immorality
is coming from your values or from your OCD. For example, allowing
yourself to have scary thoughts while using a knife to peel an apple in
the same room as a loved one may feel immoral, as if you were using
this innocent person as a guinea pig in a sick experiment. But using a
knife to cut an apple in someone’s presence does not itself
(presumably) go against your values.
No testing. For many, this is the hardest rule to stick to, but it makes
a huge difference. Testing, or checking to be certain about your
feelings about the exposure, renders the exposure useless. Trying to
prove that you won’t harm yourself or others or trying to prove that
you’re not a “bad” person only interferes with your ability to expose
yourself to uncertainty and teaches the brain that your tests are valid
assessments of reality. Extreme checking, making extraordinary
strides to get certain that your harm thoughts won’t come true (recall
the discussion on this from chapter 1), may look like ERP at times,
but it is in fact a problematic compulsion that will worsen your
symptoms and is not a treatment strategy.

I will come back to these ERP rules as applied to more specific Harm OCD
concerns in chapters 3-6. Now let’s take a look at different exposure approaches
you can employ.
In Vivo Exposure
This means doing ERP to real circumstances you may be avoiding because of
your Harm OCD. This could include exposure to driving, to windows (if you fear
jumping), to knives, or to other things you see as threatening. It could include
purposely being around people who are triggering. More than just being around
these triggering objects or people, in vivo ERP involves interacting with them.
For example, you could be using a pair of scissors for an art project while allowing
yourself to have thoughts about stabbing yourself with them, or going for a walk
with a triggering person where there may not be someone else to observe you to
make sure you do not cause harm.
Additionally, to get on top of any kind of Harm OCD, the first thing you need
to do is identify and reduce safety behaviors. If you have knives, pills, and so on
locked away so that you don’t impulsively use them to cause harm, then you need
to get them out in plain view as soon as you can. If you recall from the
description of the obsessive-compulsive cycle in chapter 1, our compulsive
behaviors actually reinforce the connection between obsessions, our beliefs about
them, and how we feel we must respond to them. Naturally, the presence of harm
thoughts can be discomforting and, therefore, you are initially driven to avoid
that discomfort. Yet at the same time, when we avoid things, we send a message
to the brain that those things are dangerous. To turn this around, we need to
interact with the things we feel compelled to avoid and send a message to the
brain that these things are not the threats they appear to be. We do this not by
giving ourselves reassurances, but by demonstrating it with our behavior. The
endgame is not to prove the obsession away, but to stop resisting the uncertainty
regarding its content.
For example, a person with unwanted thoughts about harming children may
feel compelled to avoid walking down a street near a school where children may
be present. In vivo exposure and response prevention here would be to purposely
walk down that street and allow whatever thoughts and feelings this elicits to
come along for the walk. Remember, it is of utmost importance here that this not

be looked at as a testing exercise, an opportunity to see how you handle the
thoughts or to prove to yourself that you won’t harm a child. The message you
are trying to send to your brain here is that you are capable of walking along the
street in the presence of children and in the presence of the thoughts that they
trigger without responding compulsively. That is how you get the brain to tag
these thoughts as meaningless chatter. If they are not worthy of arguing with,
they are not worth worrying about.
Imaginal Exposure
This means doing exposure in your mind. You may find your imagination a
nuisance because you keep imagining terrible things, but here you can use it to
your advantage. This can be done alongside in vivo exposure, such as sitting next
to someone while imagining harming that person, or it can be done separately, as
in writing a narrative describing your harm thoughts becoming real. For many
with Harm OCD, the line between in vivo and imaginal exposure is blurry. If you
are afraid that having violent thoughts could lead to violent actions, then
imagining violent actions is both in vivo (confronting the actual feared
experience) and imaginal (envisioning the feared experience occurring). Using
the example above, while doing the in vivo exposure of walking near children
when they trigger your harm thoughts, you might also include the imaginal
exposure of telling yourself that you could harm one of them, or purposely
picturing yourself harming them (again, no testing). Telling stories in your head
without slipping into mental rituals can be a difficult task. You may find it easier
to resist compulsions when doing imaginal exposure in written form. Let’s take a
look at some written imaginal exposure techniques, also knows as scripts.
Acceptance and Motivation Scripts
Harm OCD has a way of blindsiding you with such grotesque and offensive
intrusive thoughts that it’s easy to forget that resisting compulsions is number
one on your agenda. To be consistent in standing up to your Harm OCD, you
need to first accept that you really have these unwanted thoughts and that you
really are about to confront uncertainty about them to overcome it. It’s
completely normal to find this idea to be overwhelming and to doubt your ability

to rise to the challenge. To stay motivated, you can write a script that lays out
what you’re honestly signing up for in the fight against OCD.
In the section below, I’ve written out the format for an acceptance and
motivation script. You can read through this and try it on your own later, or you
can pull out a piece of paper and get to work on one now. You will also get
another chance to explore this technique throughout part 2 of this book.
My Acceptance and Motivation Script
A good to way to construct this exercise is to write out the four questions
that follow, then take some notes on what you think the answers are, then
put it together into one four-paragraph script.
Question 1: What behaviors am I going to change?
Write out a list of all of the ways you try to get certainty about your violent
thoughts and state assertively that you are going to cease them. Don’t worry
if you find this hard to believe just yet or you don’t feel ready to stop all of
your compulsions this very moment. Just state what they are and that you
are going to change them. Think of statements like “I am going to stop
avoiding the knife drawer” or “I am going to start going to the top floor of
the building.”
Question 2: What unwanted consequences am I risking?
Write out a list of all of the terrible things you can imagine happening as a
result of stopping compulsions. This can be as straightforward as saying that
you might harm a specific person or as abstract as saying you might be driven
mad by never getting the answers. Writing this may be scary, but the point is
to be honest with yourself about how hard it is to take the risk of getting
better so that when you do, you do so with real purpose. Keep all of your
language in uncertainty, using words like might, may, or could, instead of
will. Instead of saying “I worry that xyz will happen if I stop my
compulsions,” try to push yourself to more assertively state “Because I am
stopping my compulsions, xyz may happen…”
Question 3: What is the likely outcome of continuing to obey the OCD?

Try to imagine putting no effort into fighting OCD. Picture yourself as a
perfect slave to the disorder, devoting 100% of your attention to the pursuit
of certainty about your unwanted thoughts. Describe in detail what this
would actually look like. Include the costs of this behavior, both the literal
financial ones (not being able to work, being hospitalized, and so on) and
the more abstract ones (the heartbreak your decline would cause your loved
ones). The point is to demonstrate the unacceptability of life with untreated
Harm OCD. End your list with the statement that you will still not have the
certainty you are seeking despite your extreme efforts. You can use certainty
language here, such as will and going to.
Question 4: What do I value that makes it worth it for me to fight my
Harm OCD?
Think about what kind of person your OCD tells you that you are. Now
think about what kind of person you suspect you probably really are. They’re
quite different. Who are you such that you would be willing to fight OCD
when doing so is this scary? What’s it worth to you to get back to being that
person? What kind of spouse, sibling, parent, professional, and so on do you
believe yourself to really be when unburdened by your Harm OCD? Given
these qualities, and the fact that compulsions don’t work, why is it worth it
for you to make these changes and fight your OCD?
Once you have your completed document, you can read it daily to help
point you in the right direction. You can also edit it however you see fit to
enhance it over time. The important thing is to make sure you hit all four
points and keep them present in your mind:
1. You are going to stand up to OCD by changing specific behaviors.
2. Changing these behaviors is scary because you believe it could result
in your fears coming true.
3. Staying the same means living as a slave to perpetually worsening
OCD.
4. It is worth it to change your behavior and accept uncertainty about
your fears because of who you are and what you really care about.

Flooding Scripts
If you think about why you do compulsions at all, it’s not an exclusively
intellectual exercise. Wanting to prove that you won’t cause harm is only part of
the equation. Alongside these disgusting thoughts is a feeling. It might be
different for everyone, but most of my clients describe it as dread, guilt, terror, or
some combination of the three. So compulsions often arise from a desperate
attempt to get painful feelings to subside, even temporarily. If we keep our eye on
the ball here (stop compulsions), then exposure strategies that help us habituate
to or make space for these feelings can be an excellent tool. What I am calling
“flooding scripts” here involves writing out a description of thoughts and events
in such a way that they elicit the same (or worse) feelings you get when your
become aware of your unwanted thoughts. The aim is to generate the urge to do
compulsions for the purpose of practicing being in that urge without doing those
compulsions. Here’s a template that might be effective (you can do this now or
continue reading through and practice this another time):
Describe your OCD’s claim as if it were fact. Start with an
affirmation or admission, as in “I am going to do xyz” or “these
thoughts mean xyz” or “I am doing xyz.” Don’t let on that you have a
fear about it or suffer from a common disorder like OCD. Just go
straight to what the OCD is saying and agree with it. “I am going to
snap and kill my daughter with a knife,” for example.
Describe what happens when you act on your thoughts or when your
fears otherwise come true. What happens in that moment that you
snap and go over the edge? Describe the victim of your violence
(even if the victim is you) and the experience that victim has as a
result of your fear coming true.
Describe the consequences of these actions in the long term and how
they ultimately impact your legacy in a way that you find
unacceptable.
Remember, in this kind of scripting, we’re not interested in uncertainty or in
the truth of the thoughts. We’re focused only on generating uncomfortable

feelings for the purpose of learning how to feel them without doing compulsions.
This script does not have to make a ton of sense or follow a specific chronology.
All that matters is that it generates the feeling of needing to do compulsions and
that the script does not contain within it any reassurance or other attempts to
argue with the OCD. You may be thinking that you’re already feeling this pain on
a daily basis, so it’s redundant to go out of your way to generate it, but consider
that this exercise is about choosing to have the feelings and not about trying to
defend yourself from them or simply put up with them.
You can write a fresh script daily, write a template script and read it often each
day, or write a script and record and listen to it repeatedly. It’s perfectly
understandable that you may not want this script to fall into the wrong hands.
It’s going to be pretty nasty stuff and, out of context, it could be alarming to
someone who comes across it by accident. If this is a particular concern of yours,
the script is just as effective if you destroy it after each writing. A good flooding
script is the mental equivalent of touching a dumpster when you’re afraid of
germs and keeping your hand there as long as it takes to stop feeling
overwhelmed. Remember, all that matters for this tool to be effective is that it
generates an urge to do compulsions and that you aim to sit with that urge rather
than sate it.
Speaking of sitting…
Mindfulness and Harm OCD
While ERP is the gold standard of OCD treatment, and indeed the best way to
become of master at resisting compulsions and accepting uncertainty, finding the
right mindset for this arduous task may be difficult. You’re already getting
hammered on a regular basis by horrifying thoughts, sickening guilt, and
debilitating anxiety. OCD uses this to lead you around aimlessly through what
feels like the never-ending expanse of outer space. But what if instead of being
lost in space with your OCD, you could position yourself seated in a planetarium
looking up at the stars and directing your own attention? This skill of being able
to view thoughts as thoughts and rest your awareness on what is, instead of on
what could be, is called mindfulness.

Sharks in the Aquarium
Here in the Baltimore area we have a terrific National Aquarium. After you
make your way through the tropical fish, the frogs, the jellyfish, and so on, you
get to my favorite part, the sharks. The tour ends with a series of ramps that work
their way down to a circular aquarium below. The lights are dim and ominous
Jaws-esque music emanates from hidden speakers. If you stand in front of any
window, a shark will eventually swim by. Because the aquarium is circular, the
shark will eventually swim by your window again if you stay in the same place.
The funny thing is, even though it is clear that you’re not in any danger, the
combination of the lighting, the music, and the sheer creepiness of these
creatures is kind of disturbing. But because you know you’re not in harm’s way on
this side of the glass, you allow yourself to be disturbed. You also allow yourself to
notice their beauty, the way they move, the different shapes they come in, and so
on. They are more than just the thoughts and feelings they elicit.
Having OCD feels a lot like being in a shark tank with the sharks. When you
see a shark coming at you, you don’t just tread water and observe it. You scramble
to get away. Your thoughts, like sharks, seem like they can destroy you.
Mindfulness means remembering that you are not in the shark tank—you are in
the aquarium. The shark may still be disturbing, but you allow the disturbance to
come and go. When we are mindful, the harm thoughts are just individual sharks
in the aquarium swimming by. The anxiety, fear, and disgust we experience with
OCD are also just different kinds of sharks to watch. The physical sensations you
associate with snapping or losing control—again, these are just sharks in the
aquarium (maybe that weird one with a saw for a face). Self-critical thoughts
about having harm obsessions? More sharks. When we identify with the mind
and see ourselves as fused with our thoughts, we find ourselves in the shark tank.
But when we remember to be mindful, we remember we are really just at the
aquarium.
Right, but what if the glass breaks and the sharks come pouring out and eat my face
while I’m drowning in a stew of fish feces and broken glass?
Okay, so mindfulness doesn’t come easy, I know.
Mindfulness is the ability to observe your experiences as they are, in the
present moment, and without judgment. The problem with OCD is that the
disorder yanks your attention from the present and insists that you do

compulsions and rituals in order to return. Developing your mindfulness skills
can help improve your awareness of when you’re being pulled from the present by
your OCD and provide the tools for coming back to the present without having
to do the compulsions or rituals. Mindfulness also enhances your ability to
observe your thoughts, feelings, and sensations as they really are—as thoughts,
feelings, and sensations.
Harm OCD triggers are often quick, sharp, and brutal, like the content of the
associated thoughts. Because of this, sufferers coping with Harm OCD are likely
to jump from what triggered them straight to some behavior that relieves the
pain (a compulsion). But between the trigger and the compulsion is an
experience. That experience includes what you think about the trigger and how
it feels to want to neutralize it. When we skip over this middle part, however, we
miss the opportunity to interfere in the obsessive-compulsive cycle. If we are
mindful, by which I mean if we can stay present with the trigger, our experience
of it, and the urge to do compulsions, then there is an opportunity to stand up to
the OCD.
Understanding What a Mind Does
Consider that your mind is just whatever it is that you look through in order to
see what’s going on inside the brain. Your mind is like a flashlight that you point
at different territories in a landscape made up of ideas, emotions, and sensations.
You can have any kind of thought that is available to be had, and when you say
you are having a particular thought, you mean you are shining the light on this
idea in this present moment. Some thoughts are more pleasant to shine a light on
than others. The problem with OCD is that if you identify areas of your mental
landscape to be off limits, that’s where the OCD goes.
The OCD wants one thing only, to dominate your attention so that you engage
in compulsions. So it’s no mystery that OCD plants its flag in the territory most
offensive to you, the territory of causing harm. It adds insult to this injury by
focusing the envisioned harm on the things you care the most about. If you try to
avoid these territories, the OCD grows and starts staking its claim on areas you
normally enjoy looking at. As Harm OCD worsens, your fear of knives, for
example, becomes a fear of cooking, and then a fear of the kitchen, and then not
even wanting to think about food. You have to be willing to wander through

some of those darker, scarier territories, not to live there but to step on the weeds
enough so they don’t grow into the rest of your mental landscape.
Mindfulness works by repeatedly repositioning you as an observer behind the
flashlight instead of as a victim of what the flashlight shines on. Consider the
difference between “I am going to cause harm” and “I am noticing thoughts
about causing harm.” Consider the difference between “I am freaking out” and “I
am aware of the presence of anxiety.” By shifting your perspective, you can stay
present with whatever the OCD dishes out. Rather than fighting the OCD with
ineffective compulsions, you fight it with the one thing OCD cannot counter—
willingness to experience things as they are.
A Brief Mindfulness Meditation
1. +Find a comfortable, mostly quiet place to sit.
2. Close your eyes and put your attention on the weight of your body
against the chair or floor. Notice any other senses that may be active,
such as hearing or smelling. Think: This is me in this moment.
3. Direct your attention to the sensation of breathing. This will be your
anchor. I like to rest my attention on the sensation of my stomach
pressing on my shirt as I inhale, but you can attend to wherever the
breath is most easy to recognize for you.
4. The name of the game is to leave your attention here. It’s not about
trying to focus hard on the breath, but rather resting your attention
here like you might rest your head on a loved one’s belly. (I use my
dog’s belly as a pillow sometimes.) Watch the breath begin, the body
expand, the breath shift from inhale to exhale, the breath leave, and
the breath shift again from exhale back to inhale.
5. As you continue to do this, you will have thoughts. They will range
anywhere from thoughts about how boring or awkward meditation
can be to the scary thoughts your OCD is always going on about.
This is fine. Actually, it’s what the meditation is for. When you
become aware that you are attending to your thoughts, simply

acknowledge that you are thinking and return to your breath. Set a
timer and try this for five minutes.
Don’t worry if all you got was five minutes of having thoughts hit you in the
head. The question is, were you mindful of the experience? Did you attempt to
be more aware of where your mind was in each moment? If you caught yourself
swimming around in the thoughts and feelings, trying to change them, and then
you gently placed yourself back on the other side of the glass even once, then you
were practicing mindfulness.
Self-Compassion and Harm OCD
People with OCD often have a very loud self-critical voice inside. People with
Harm OCD probably get the worst of it. It starts with the unwanted thoughts
themselves—ugly, vicious, unyielding, and presented without context or any
trigger warnings or disclaimers. But then the voice that follows may be even
worse. You’re disgusting. You’re a horrible person. You shouldn’t have had that thought.
What’s wrong with you? Who thinks that way? You are a bad person. You are the worst
person. Guilt for having harm thoughts and a pervasive black cloud of self-hatred
often follow. This voice is also a product of the OCD, but because it sounds like
you, it stings all the more. The voice may continue to taunt you, positing that
since only a horrible person has these thoughts, you are somehow more
susceptible to doing the things that only horrible people do, despite the fact that
there is no evidence that people with OCD act on their unwanted thoughts.
For many with Harm OCD, this results in such a profound mistrust of the self
that basic daily activities feel too risky. How can I justify spending time with my
children if I could pitch them over the second-floor railing at any time? Who am I to
hold this pen if I could stab the person next to me at any moment? Why should I be
allowed to watch the news if a story about a murderer could send me into a
psychopathic rage against my neighbors? Who am I to pet this dog when I can’t be sure I
won’t strangle him?
In treating OCD, we work on confronting our fears and changing the
behaviors that fuel them. But we often forget to work on challenging how we talk
to ourselves about having the fears in the first place. If the OCD can effectively
cut you down as a human being for even having the thought, how will you find

the strength to fight your OCD? Compassion researcher Kristin Neff identifies
compassion as a combination of empathy (the ability to feel what others are
feeling) and the desire to ease suffering (Neff 2011). Self-compassion is thus
applying this concept to oneself the way we might intuitively apply it to others in
pain. If we understand how to access self-compassion, we can use this as an
effective tool against OCD. Ask yourself how often you do compulsions just
because you fear that you will treat yourself badly if you don’t do them. What if
you didn’t have to be afraid of that because you knew that no matter what
happens, you’ll help you get through it?
Being Honest About Your Experience
Neff describes three core elements of self-compassion: mindfulness, common
humanity, and self-kindness. Each of these elements can highlight how self-
compassion is also about being honest about your experience of having Harm
OCD. The OCD lies all day about what a terrible person you are and it does this
to wear you down and get you to do compulsions. Honesty about your experience
is a great weapon in your arsenal against the OCD. “I am a horrible excuse for a
human being and if people knew what I thought, they’d want to lock me up” is
not an honest statement. It’s a fear. An honest statement is “I have unwanted
harm thoughts and I worry that they mean something bad about me.” This is also
a mindful statement. Remember, mindfulness is observing an experience without
judgment in the present moment. It’s viewing things as they are, not as your
OCD says they might be.
“Common humanity” refers to the recognition that your experiences are
shared by others, whether the OCD wants you to think so or not. Many people
(including those without OCD) have unwanted taboo intrusive thoughts
(Rachman and de Silva 1978). Compare the dishonest statement of “I am a freak
for having these thoughts” to “Many people have unwanted thoughts, and people
like me with OCD are especially likely to notice and worry about them.” This is
important to acknowledge because the likelihood is that if you did not have
OCD, these same thoughts with violent content would be viewed as nothing but
random pieces of mental debris. Part of being self-compassionate is taking an
extra moment to remind yourself both that we all have violent thoughts and also
that you are not alone as an OCD sufferer concerned about them.

“Self-kindness” simply means treating yourself as you would treat anyone else
you cared about who was suffering. Self-criticism focuses on everything you think
you are doing wrong. But if you are reading this book, you have to admit that you
are doing at least something right in your battle with unwanted harm thoughts.
You picked up a self-help book. See the difference between the dishonest and
self-critical statement of “I’m such a disgusting loser for having these thoughts”
and the more honest and kind statement: “This is so hard, but I’m doing the best
I can to resist compulsions right now and trying to learn what I can to get control
over my Harm OCD.”
These three concepts can be put together into a coping statement or they can
be used à la carte, but cultivating an internal voice that is honest instead of self-
abusive, that wants you to win the battle against Harm OCD, is a wise move. I’ll
give you some tips on creating self-compassion statements for your specific
obsessions in part 2.
H.E.A.L.ing from Harm OCD
In this chapter, we have looked at four approaches to reclaiming power over your
Harm OCD, namely: cognitive approaches, exposure and response prevention,
mindfulness, and self-compassion. The opposite of Harm is HEAL, so let’s use
this as an acronym for your four main Harm OCD-fighting tools.
H: Have Another Look (cognitive approaches). This is really all that cognitive
approaches to OCD require—that you have another look at your thoughts before
doing compulsions. Noting cognitive distortions and weighing them against other
potential ways of thinking about an experience requires you only to step back
and recognize, “Hey, I’m thinking and there is a way in which I am thinking right
now that may or may not be useful.”
E: Exposure and Response Prevention (ERP). Getting out in front of a trigger
and learning how to be in its presence intentionally and without compulsions is
the most effective way to break free from the obsessive-compulsive cycle and put
an end to the negative reinforcement that keeps you stuck. How can you lean in
to an OCD punch and use the energy this produces to come out on top of your
fear? By engaging in exposures to the violent thoughts while reducing safety

behaviors and eliminating compulsions, you can change the hold this disorder
has over you.
A: Acceptance and Mindfulness. Everything you need to know about
mindfulness can be summed up in the words, “Hey, look at that.” By stepping
back and recognizing that you are experiencing thoughts, feelings, and
sensations, not threats, warnings, and condemnations, you can find stillness and
openness to whatever your mind happens to be offering. By accepting the
presence of these unwanted thoughts, you disempower them. Remember, by
developing your mindfulness skills, you can stop viewing your harm thoughts as
sharks with you in a shark tank and instead view your thoughts as sharks with
you at an aquarium, simply swimming by.
L: Love Yourself (self-compassion). Self-compassion means treating yourself as
you would your best friend. If you accept the presence of your thoughts (not the
meaning or content of your thoughts), recognize that you are not alone in your
frustration and fear, and focus on what you’re doing right and how you can help
yourself, the sadistic voice of OCD doesn’t stand a chance. These tenets of
mindfulness, common humanity, and self-kindness combine to bring your
attention away from self-doubt and toward your profound personal strengths.
It’s important to remember that these are not separate approaches in the sense
that they should be implemented in any particular order, or that any one
approach is always going to be more effective than another. In fact, all of the
elements of HEAL will include all of the other elements of HEAL. Having
another look (H) at your experience by recognizing distorted thinking requires
you to stay exposed to the thoughts (E). This requires that you first accept (A)
that these are the thoughts going through your head and finally, by choosing to
respond differently to your OCD and being willing to accept uncertainty in that
moment, you are engaging in self-compassion, and treating yourself as someone
worthy of love (L).
You’re Not Crazy
So far you’ve done a lot of exposure. You picked up a book with the words
“Harm OCD” in the title. You read the first chapter that went over

assessment and diagnosis, and that probably triggered you to no end with
commentary on all the problems you might have besides Harm OCD. Yet
you persevered. You moved on to read about why we have these thoughts
and how we can never be certain about them because we can’t be certain of
anything. This might have been upsetting too, yet you persevered. You read
through a crash course of treatment tools, many of which may seem
daunting or too hard right now. Your OCD is always trying to make you feel
like you’re different from others, and in some ways you do have to be
different. To stand up to Harm OCD, you have to possess a quality of
bravery that not everyone possesses. You’re not crazy. You’re something far
more interesting.
Recap
Okay, chapter 2 and all of part 1 of this book are behind you. Well done! Chapter
2 reviewed a lot of clinical material at once, so don’t worry if you feel like you
don’t have a firm grasp on all the concepts. They will each be explored in more
depth in part 2, where we look at different manifestations of Harm OCD. What
were some of the basic ideas? First, at the core of mastery over OCD is your
willingness to accept uncertainty. Though your Harm OCD presents you with
terrifying thought content, uncertainty remains a constant. But accepting
uncertainty doesn’t mean you have to resign yourself to being unhappy or to lie
to yourself about the odds of your fears being true. Next we looked at four main
tools for fighting Harm OCD, which you can remember with the acronym
H.E.A.L. H stands for Have Another Look, which refers to cognitive approaches
that can help you challenge distorted thinking that fuels your OCD. E stands for
ERP (exposure and response prevention), which means learning to stop doing
compulsions by challenging yourself to confront your fears methodically. A stands
for acceptance, which is an important part of mindfulness, the ability to observe
your thoughts and feeling as they are in the present moment. L stands for Love
Yourself, referring to using self-compassion to break away from the cycle of self-
hatred that OCD uses to keep you enslaved. In the chapters ahead, I will take
these treatment tools and techniques and apply them to four specific
manifestations of Harm OCD.

T
PART 2
Using the Principles of H.E.A.L.
for Different Manifestations of
Harm OCD
he next four chapters are going to cover four common manifestations of
Harm OCD. You may find that only one resonates with you or you may
find that a few or all of them do. It is not unusual for Harm OCD to
bounce around. You might think of OCD as a carnivorous dinosaur from Jurassic
Park, constantly testing the fences for weaknesses to see a way through to
wreaking havoc. The OCD lives off of compulsions, so it will look for whatever is
most likely to get you to respond compulsively. This is why establishing broad
OCD-fighting, uncertainty-accepting skills is more effective than arguing in your
head over the content of any individual thought. The first chapter of this section
will focus on this fear at the identity level, as well as the fear of causing harm
through lack of vigilance or error. I recommend that you read this chapter first to
lay the groundwork for the following three chapters on the fear of impulsive
harm, the fear of self-harm, and the fear of harming your children.

CHAPTER 3
Fear of a Harmful Identity
At the beginning of this book, I introduced you to Joanna, who feared that her
lack of vigilance could have put her husband at unnecessary risk of poison. In
that example, she also worried that she might have harbored unwanted bad
intentions. She wanted certainty that she was careful enough not to cause
accidental harm and moral enough not to cause intentional harm. You may have
noticed how careful and moral can feel like the same thing. Like many people who
struggle with this kind of OCD, Joanna was faced with an impossible task—to
become certain about what her intentions were. But we can only know what our
intentions are in the present moment.
People with Harm OCD have a tendency to attach distorted meanings to their
intrusive thoughts, specifically believing that the thoughts must mean they are
“bad” or “dangerous” people, and this causes so much distress that it makes them
respond with more extreme attempts (compulsions) to neutralize the thoughts
(Riskind, Ayers, and Wright 2007). I don’t think words can do justice to the level
of suffering people with OCD endure when they come to the false conclusion
that their violent thoughts make them vile people. I say you’re not violent or vile.
You’re just too tuned in to a scary station in your head and you’ve yet to establish
the skill set required to permit yourself to tune in to other stations.
Fearing Unintentional Harm Through Lack of
Vigilance
The majority of this book focuses on the fear of intending to cause harm, the fear
of committing acts of violence, or the burden of thinking violent thoughts. The
term “Harm OCD” is rarely used in the clinical literature. Research tends to look
at “violent” or “aggressive” obsessions. Yet, if I leave a knife on the table and my

little daughter cuts herself with it by accident, I am going to feel pretty bad about
it. I’m going to think that I should have taken more care to make sure she
wouldn’t come in harm’s way. I might wonder: How much effort should I put into
keeping harm from reaching her? If I admit the truth, that no matter how much
the effort I make, it is still limited, I am left vulnerable to attacks from the OCD
saying that I am a harmful person. This can be viewed as Harm OCD too,
whether it involves the presence of violent thoughts or not.
When school is in session, I help get my kids ready in the morning and I wait
with them for the bus at the bottom of the driveway. I spend as much time as I
can protecting them, teaching them, entertaining them, and letting them know
that they are loved. When the bus comes, I put them on it and I go to work.
That’s right, I devote all of my energy to keeping them safe and then I put them
on a bus, driven by a man I don’t know, to a location I won’t be at. What if this
bus driver decides today’s the day he wants to start drinking first thing in the
morning and he passes out at the wheel and sends the bus flying into oncoming
traffic, killing several people, including my children? Okay, that would be tragic,
but why did I let them on the bus in the first place? I could have driven them to
school. I could have gotten to work late. The answer is, I limited the amount of
effort toward keeping them safe to something I felt was reasonable. But how do I
know for certain that it was reasonable and not evidence of a lack of feeling, lack
of compassion, or lack of grip on reality? I don’t. I have to be able to not-know. If
you are unable to sit with not-knowing, the OCD can convince you of pretty
much anything, and that can keep you from doing anything you really value.
Knowing things (for example, being confident that my children are safe on the
bus) and not-knowing things (for example, being able to go to work without
being certain of their status) are both important skills.
Obsessing About Being Good
Living with OCD is very much like having a voice in your head that repeatedly
admonishes you for being a bad person. Escaping such self-abuse is one reason
you do compulsions. OCD says you’re bad because of things you’ve done, things
you’ve thought, and even things you haven’t done or thought but could have! So
how do you accept uncertainty about being “bad”? If I treat my violent thoughts

as just OCD chatter, I have to accept the possibility that they could be something
more. If I accept the possibility that I may be wrong about OCD, that these
thoughts may actually be dangerous signs or something like that, then how can I
morally let them go? Shouldn’t I devote 100% of my energy and attention to
making sure my potential sociopathic traits don’t go unchecked? Should there
even be a limit to the amount of effort I put into making sure I am not a bad
person? If I ever do hurt someone, the horror of that won’t just be about the act
itself, but about the fact that I was not vigilant enough to prevent it early on
when I knew I had bad thoughts! Quite a mess.
The reason why you suffer so pervasively with the fear of being a harmful or
“bad” person has to do in part with how you set your standards in the first place.
People with OCD set the standard for good in terms of certainty. In other words,
I am good when I am certain I am good. I am bad when I am uncertain. People
without OCD may or may not set their standards for “goodness” high, but they
set them mostly in some achievable place. They either achieve it and feel
content or they don’t and they feel guilty. People with OCD cannot achieve their
standard for goodness because the standard is certainty and certainty doesn’t exist.
So no matter how hard you try, you end up feeling guilty anyway, thinking you’re
getting close at times, but never quite getting there. Why? Because “there” is an
illusion created by your OCD. In other words, many people have what you might
call unrealistic expectations for determining whether or not they are good people
who have done no harm. They work harder than they have to in order to feel
good about themselves. But OCD sufferers don’t just have unrealistic
expectations—they have unreal expectations.
Assessing for Safety
Assessing simply means asking the right questions to help find out more about
something and, with the right information, identifying a course of action that is
most likely to be helpful. Assessing whether you are an inherently harmful or
immoral person is challenging because some of the more obvious answers turn
out to be messy when you look closely. For example, Do you like harm thoughts?
Naturally, you’d assume that not liking harm thoughts is a good answer because it
suggests you just have OCD and don’t need to worry about the rest of it. But

what if you like some harm thoughts sometimes? Doesn’t this book repeatedly say
it’s normal to have these thoughts? If they’re normal, why not like them if you
can? So the questions for assessing when it might be appropriate to be concerned
have to be more specific and focused. Some important questions could be:
Do you voluntarily fantasize for large amounts of time about your
violent thoughts coming true?
Do you wish you could get away with acting out on your violent
thoughts?
How would you feel about these events coming true?
How would you feel about the way your actions would affect others?
Proper assessment by a mental health professional may tease out useful
differences between someone whose main issues involve being overly afraid of
unwanted thoughts and someone with, say, poor anger-management skills or a
lack of empathy. Sociopathy (a word used synonymously with Antisocial
Personality Disorder) is characterized by an indifference for, or lack of guilt
regarding, the suffering of others (APA 2013). Of course, as you read this, your
OCD is likely to tell you that you have to check and make sure that you feel
enough guilt about this or that idea. That’s not the point. We have to accept
uncertainty in all things. But in treatment, the therapist needs enough
information to determine when exposure therapy is going to be effective and
when some other treatment for some other issue makes more sense.
All this being said, consider that it is your very interest in the subject of being
good that points to the likelihood that you are not a sociopath. More likely, your
OCD makes you overflowing with empathy and compassion. This overflow is
actually the root of the problem.
Common Obsessions in Fearing a Harmful Identity
Fear of hitting someone with the car and not knowing it (or knew it
but blocked it out mentally)
Fear of inadvertently influencing someone to do harm

Fear of facilitating harm to come to your loved ones (or pets) by lack
of vigilance
Fear of worsening someone’s life as a form of harm
Fear of causing harm by spreading contaminants due to not washing
thoroughly or not avoiding vigilantly
Fear of allowing others to be harmed by leaving contaminated items
accessible
Fear of poisoning others with expired food, “unsafe” food, or
improperly cooked food, or by allowing contaminants to have
touched food
Fear of being in denial of a latent other-sexuality (gay if you identify
as straight, straight if you identify as gay, and so on), resulting in
severe emotional harm to a significant other
Fear of causing harm to others by negligence (for example, causing a
fire by not checking if the stove is off, causing a burglary by not
checking if the doors are locked)
Fear of allowing harm to occur by leaving “dangerous” objects around
(for example, seeing a potentially distracting object in the street that
could cause a traffic accident or seeing a loose nail that could be used
as a weapon or cause a structure to collapse)
Fear of causing a romantic partner such distress that that partner
might harm him- or herself or have an unhappy or “wasted” life
Fear of harming loved ones by not perfectly meeting their needs (for
example, harming a child by not playing enough with her and making
her feel “abandoned”)
Fear of harming loved ones by exposing them to “inappropriate”
material (for example, violent movies or age-inappropriate music)
Fear of harming someone by saying the wrong thing or getting
someone in trouble inadvertently (for example, getting your coworker
fired or causing your therapist to have her license revoked)

Fear of contributing to global problems that cause harm to innocent
people (for example, buying an article of clothing that might have
been manufactured in poor conditions where children are harmed)
This may seem like a long list, but it’s really just a list of things I have heard in
my clinical practice. Your unique ability to access the creative mind likely has you
already noticing other examples I’ve missed. If there’s a way for harm to come to
you or others and for it be your fault, you’ll think of it eventually!
Common Compulsions for the Fear of a Harmful
Identity
This whole book could be filled with a list of compulsions people do when they
fear living with a harmful identity. This is by no means a comprehensive list, but
a small sample of behaviors you might find yourself doing in response to
unwanted violent thoughts or moral concerns about doing harm:
Mentally reviewing past acts, conversations, or thoughts to assess if
there were any signs of violent or sociopathic behavior
Mental rituals that include trying to figure out with certainty if you
did, could, or would commit a harmful act
Researching serial killers for reassurance to determine if there are
important similarities in personality or behavior
Testing your mind to see if you like harmful thoughts
Avoiding triggers in the media, news stories, and so on
Avoiding situations or objects where unintentional harm could take
place (for example, driving, cooking, using chemicals)
Avoiding situations where there is any responsibility for protecting
others from harm (for example, babysitting or visiting someone in the
hospital)
Avoiding emotional states you imagine could lead to harm (for
example, anger, stress, lack of control)

Neutralizing violent thoughts with “clean” or “safe” thoughts
Excessive checking of self or others to ensure no harm was done
Excessive checking of locks, faucets, outlets, and so on where you
imagine harm could occur
Seeking reassurance from others that you are a good person and not a
sociopath, and that you would never harm someone
Confessing perceived bad thoughts or acts
Let’s take a closer look at how the OCD can get you stuck in this kind of mind
trap and how you can get yourself unstuck using the tools of HEAL.
H: Have Another Look
Cognitive approaches to the fear of a harmful or immoral identity can be very
useful. If you can see how your way of processing the harm thoughts is pushing
you into compulsions, you can shift your approach to something more objective
and rational. This doesn’t mean reassuring yourself that you’re good. A client
who was frustrated with his OCD always telling him he’s bad once asked me why
OCD doesn’t try to convince him that he’s good. The answer is because that
doesn’t take convincing.
A good way of understanding this part of treating OCD is to imagine the OCD
as having its own wants and needs. By using cognitive distortions, it shows you
what it wants you to think. Let’s take a look at how some of the cognitive
distortions common in OCD can present themselves in this specific
manifestation:
Thought-Action Fusion: Allowing these harm thoughts to persist is causing harm to
others. This is a common and scary cognitive error, but the fact that it is scary
shouldn’t change the fabric of reality. Whether you worry that your thoughts will
cause a harmful outcome or you worry that your thoughts are themselves
immoral acts, remember that what happens in your mind actually stays in your
mind.

Catastrophizing: I am going to live in misery and denial if I can’t prove that my
intentions were good. The surest way to bully you into doing compulsions is to
threaten a lifetime of unhappiness and to convince you of the lie that doing
compulsions will protect you from such a life. Since you can’t predict the future,
trying to protect yourself from it with mental rituals is a poor use of your
attention. Not only can you not predict the future, you can never be certain
what your intentions were in the past. We only ever know what our intentions
are right now in this exact moment.
Discounting the Positive: This thought proves I am a monster. Yeah, but what
about all the people you haven’t killed in your mind today? The OCD doesn’t
want you to recognize the lifetime of compassionate behavior and love you’ve
displayed up to five seconds ago. It wants you to focus only on this one thought
in this moment as indicating who you are.
Tunnel Vision: I responded to that article about a murderer the way I did because I
am like that. It’s important to remember that you notice what you notice because
that’s what obsessing about something means. If you have a fear of being a
dangerous person and you notice your heart rate go up when you read about a
school shooting, then it is wise to acknowledge that this is a predictable reaction
and not a sign or premonition.
Emotional Reasoning: I feel like a monster. Treating your feelings like completely
reliable sources of information about who you are can easily backfire. Sometimes
you are terrified of your thoughts, and sometimes you are bored by those same
thoughts.
Shoulds: I should never have violent thoughts. Here, you need to pay attention to
the role of unreal expectations discussed earlier. Violent thoughts are a necessary
and useful part of the human psyche. You could argue that it would benefit you
not to spend a ton of time dwelling on violent thoughts, and that your attention
may have more valuable places to rest. This is not the same thing as rigidly
demanding that you never have these thoughts.
E: Exposure and Response Prevention

For instructions on how to methodically construct an ERP plan, I recommend
working with a therapist who specializes in OCD. If you are unable to access one,
then there are several excellent self-help workbooks on OCD that can go into
greater 
specifics 
on 
constructing 
an 
ERP 
treatment 
plan 
(see
https://iocdf.org/books/ for a comprehensive list). Here I will go over some useful
ideas to consider for doing exposure to your fear of a harmful identity. First, let’s
review the three rules about doing ERP from chapter 2.
Important Rules for ERP
Don’t do exposure in a manner where accidental harm is likely to
take place. Exposure to fears of a harmful identity can be nuanced,
and the line between being less compulsive and being dangerous to
others is not always clear. Leaving a door ajar when your OCD tells
you that someone could bump into it and hurt their head could be an
effective exposure. Pulling a parking brake one time instead of three
and accepting that it might malfunction and cause your car to roll
into traffic might be good. Placing a bunch of broken glass and
marbles on a stair case, not so much. Always bear in mind that the
goal is to learn to live with uncertainty. This does not mean you have
to try to create chaos or actively bring harm to others.
You don’t have to violate your values in the name of ERP. I shed
no tears for ants when I willfully step on or poison them. If my OCD
told me that this meant I was a closeted sociopath, then it might be a
good exposure to step on ants when I see them and even diabolically
laugh to myself about it. But if intentionally killing a living creature
goes against your morals (or your religious faith), then it is not the
best direction to take ERP. Some religious practices set rules for types
of thoughts you are allowed to dwell on. Though most educated
clergy will recommend prioritizing your mental health over sticking
to the letter of a religious law, you may wish to consult with an
advisor on what kind of exposures to uncertainty can be effective
without directly going against your religious beliefs. In any case,

challenging yourself to accept uncertainty about “right” and “wrong”
doesn’t mean you have to cheat, steal, or violate the rights of others.
No testing. Whatever you do to get out in front of your fears and
master your Harm OCD, you must take care not to allow exposures
to become checking compulsions. If you watch a movie about a serial
killer and spend the whole time analyzing whether you are or are not
too much like that character, then you are not really doing exposure,
but are just testing your reactions. Exposure and response prevention
includes preventing the attempts to get certainty about whatever
reactions the exposure brings about.
In Vivo Exposure Tips
Visiting people or places that trigger your unwanted thoughts (and
accepting or agreeing with them as they arise)
Watching triggering movies or shows about harmful people or with
violent imagery (remember, don’t use this to self-reassure, but to
practice being triggered without compulsions)
Reduce or eliminate unnecessary safety behaviors (for example,
excessive washing to avoid spreading harmful contaminants)
Reduce or eliminate unnecessary checking (for example, checking
rearview mirror to make sure you didn’t hit someone)
Consider, what would a person do who did not care as much or mind as much
about caring? How can I do exposure to the idea that I may not care the most?
The goal is not to care less but to actually be more effective in choosing
behaviors that are in line with your values. Devoting your life to attending to
moral perfection is not likely part of your value system. If you have Harm OCD,
your moral compass may be bent in a perfectionist direction. This means that
when you do exposure, you are going to feel less moral in the moment, but you
are probably still landing somewhere on the decent side of moral behavior. ERP
enables you to readjust the compass by retraining yourself to behave

noncompulsively. Compulsions always strengthen the OCD, which always takes
you further away from your loved ones, your goals, and your potentials.
Acceptance and Motivation Scripts
Confronting the idea that there is a limit to how much you care about keeping
others safe requires some real courage. An acceptance and motivation script
might help point you in the right direction. Recall from part 1, here you want to
try to honestly answer four questions about your fear and what you plan to do
about it. Start by writing about how you are going to do exposure, or what safety
behaviors or avoidances you are going to give up. Then describe what it is you
think this really risks. Use detail as best you can. Face it—if you are planning to
slack off even in the slightest regard (according to your OCD), you are opening a
doorway to potential harm to others, no matter how indirectly. What does it look
like if the less vigilant version of yourself meets feared outcomes? Then go on to
describe what is likely to happen if you continue to obey your OCD and live
submissively under its iron fist. How much checking and avoiding and
reassurance seeking will you engage in if OCD has its way? What are the real-life
consequences of this and how tolerable are they? Lastly, consider what it really
means to you to be a “good” person (and not just technically certain you are
right). How does this conceptualization of your own goodness conflict with
OCD’s demands? Here you should answer the question of why you are willing to
take the risk and do exposure.
An Example of an Acceptance and Motivation Script: “I am going to start
barbecuing in the back yard and will limit my checking of the propane tank
to one time only. This may result in me leaving it on somehow and later
causing an explosion that sets fire to my house and kills my family. I may
realize that this happened because I was not vigilant enough and I may
spend the rest of my life mired in regret. But if I continue to avoid using the
grill, I will continue to foster resentment from my children and further
strengthen my OCD to the point where I can’t use anything that involves
fire. I’ll devote huge portions of my life to checking and I still won’t get a
guarantee of no harm. I want to be the kind of parent who grills hamburgers
and celebrates outdoors with his family. I believe that a good father is a

present father and even though there are so many things that I can mess up,
it’s still worth it for me to take the risk of standing up to my OCD.”
Flooding Scripts
In this form of scripting, you are trying to generate the emotional world in
which you are most aware of the urge to do compulsions. In the context of
fearing a more general “harmfulness,” these compulsions might be simply to self-
reassure that you are good and to distinguish yourself from some kind of “bad”
person. Again, it’s important not to let these types of scripts devolve into a sort of
compulsive self-punishment exercise. Yes, you are trying to generate bad feelings
so you can be better at being in their presence without compulsions, but you are
not trying to criticize or condemn yourself. If you find that a flooding script
produces fear or self-doubt, then you are probably on the right track. But if the
script simply makes you feel more convinced of your fears and more depressed
about the likelihood of them coming true, then you are probably engaging in
compulsive self-punishment. This is important to pay attention to because the
use of self-punishment as a thought-control strategy actually makes you more
compulsive because it strengthens your false beliefs about the importance of
controlling these thoughts (Jacoby et al. 2016).
One way to approach this style of scripting is to consider what all of your
cognitive distortions are and try to write them with the distortions intact. In
other words, use this exercise to catastrophize, magnify, and emotionally reason
your way into the fear (but as always, without compulsions). Remember, it’s not
important for a flooding script to make any real sense chronologically or
narratively. As long as it puts you in the emotional space with the OCD and
gives you a chance to stand there without compulsions, then it can help break
the cycle.
An Example of a Flooding Script: “These thoughts will continue to
pervade my mind and eventually wear me down to become a person who
does not care who lives or dies. I may start hitting people with the car, but
won’t care. Or maybe I’ll feed someone poison just to see how it affects
them. If I never get caught doing these immoral acts, I will just live with the
knowledge that I am not really who I say I am. I am an imposter pretending

to be a normal human, but in secret willingly going out of my way to let bad
things happen to good people, to strangers. If I see a piece of broken glass on
the street, I will leave it there and let someone step on it and get cut. Maybe
someone will pick it up and use it to cut someone else. I don’t care. I will
allow these things to happen and rationalize that I can’t control everything,
but deep down I will know that I am simply thriving on making the world a
darker place. I will become comfortable with people getting hurt and will
make a negative contribution to humanity. I will like my violent thoughts
and I will let them define me. At some point I may rationalize killing
someone. I might get caught and put in a mental institution or executed.”
A: Acceptance and Mindfulness
You are not the greatest person who ever lived. (You probably didn’t expect to
hear something like that in a self-help book! But hear me out.) You may be great,
but you’re human and you do have your flaws. Some of these are regular everyday
flaws we grapple with and strive to overcome. Some of these aren’t flaws at all
but just thoughts about being flawed. When your mind is constantly telling you
that you’re basically good on the outside but a monster on the inside, your best
bet is to learn to be able to view the whole self by developing your mindfulness
skills.
You have thoughts about not having done enough to protect yourself and
others from your inherent horribleness. We can say those thoughts come from
your OCD, that they are meaningless, and that you can ignore them. But we can
only say that once we accept that these are the thoughts that are going through
your head. Mindfulness allows you to position yourself as an observer of these
thoughts, not a judge of them. OCD wants you in full-time judge mode. Learning
to be a nonjudgmental observer, then, is your ultimate weapon against OCD.
In meditation, we want to strengthen our ability to observe where the mind
goes when we lighten our grip on it. If you worry about harboring a harmful
identity or harming others due to irresponsibility, you may notice that a lot of the
thoughts that crop up in meditation have to do with real and imagined mistakes
from your past. You may also notice passing feelings of guilt or shame. Try to view
these as mere objects of attention instead of as projects to work on or resolve.

The better student you are of what arises in the mind, the less power your OCD
has over you.
L: Love Yourself
There’s nothing wrong with wanting to know what kind of person you are and
yearning for that to be a “good” person. The problem with OCD is that it has a
way of making you feel unsafe in your positive assumptions about yourself. It
demands constant attention and constant evidence that you are good and not
bad. It points out every unscrupulous thought, every moment of indifference, and
says, “Cling more tightly to your identity before you lose it!” The more you cling
to the identity, the more it feels like it could slip through your fingers.
To make matters worse, punishment thought-control strategies (that is, beating
yourself up and blaming yourself) are significantly associated with “unacceptable”
thoughts and thoughts about responsibility for harm (Lee et al. 2016). The more
“unacceptable” thoughts you have, the more you are inclined to treat yourself
badly, the more you believe the OCD nonsense, and the less uncertainty you are
willing to tolerate. Learning to love yourself as a person who has harm thoughts
starts with mindful acceptance. These are the thoughts going through my head and
that’s just what is.
Now consider that everyone has these thoughts and everyone struggles with
them from time to time, but people with OCD are wired to struggle with them
more. Instead of framing yourself as sick or defective, view yourself as embodying
a trait that is shared by many other people. Don’t let the OCD trick you into
isolating yourself from humanity. Remember that you are running equipment in
your head that takes some special nuance to operate smoothly and you may need
to give yourself credit and additional support for standing up to the OCD. Using
these concepts, it’s always a good idea to reframe your self-hating assessments of
life with Harm OCD into self-compassionate statements. Remember, they are
more honest.
An Example of a Coping Statement: “I’m feeling afraid that I could have
harmed someone and I’m disgusted with myself for thinking about these
things. Nobody likes feeling doubtful about who they are and we all have
unpleasant thoughts to contend with sometimes. I’m doing a pretty good job

keeping an open mind about this being OCD even while I fear it means
something terrible. I’m going to give myself permission to be uncertain about
this right now and to resist compulsions. I can invite myself to do one of my
exposure exercises and remember that this is a process that is challenging.”
You’re Not Crazy
People probably underestimate how seriously you want to do no harm. If
they don’t suffer from OCD the way you do, it’s impossible to imagine what
it’s like to stay as committed as you are to guaranteeing no harm to others.
The OCD tries to corner you between a rock and a hard place. Care about
everything 100% or resign yourself to being a monster who doesn’t care about
anyone or anything. Then prove that the caring you’re doing is genuine! This
includes caring 100% (or not) about your own happiness or fulfillment with
a mind full of violent or repugnant images. Well, it can’t be done and it
shouldn’t be done. OCD accuses you of being inhuman, but then charges
you with the task of being superhuman? Now that is a crazy idea.
Recap
H: Have Another Look. The way we think about our thoughts and feelings
affects the way we consider doing or resisting compulsions. Jumping to
conclusions that this or that must mean you are a closeted sociopath makes it
easy for OCD to dominate the conversation. Recognize when your thinking is
distorted without reassuring yourself. Acknowledge what you don’t know, that
you can’t predict the future, and that you can’t be too rigid about what happens
in your mind. It can make the difference between fueling OCD or defeating
OCD at its own game.
E: Exposure and Response Prevention. By getting out ahead of the OCD and
choosing to be exposed to things that require you to confront uncertainty, you
can become a pro at resisting compulsions. You can confront your fear by letting
go of unnecessary safety behaviors and committing to do things and be around
people even when they trigger you. Scripting about the idea that you could be

harboring a malevolent identity can be an especially effective way to get at this
kind of Harm OCD.
A: Acceptance and Mindfulness. The human mind can be trained to walk a
path, but not a perfectly straight one. Like a puppy, it can’t help but sniff around
new territory and present you with ideas that may be confusing or upsetting, or
that may appear threatening. Remembering that thoughts and feelings are always
simple objects of attention can make the decision to resist compulsions much
easier to access.
L: Love and Self-Compassion. You care too much because you think too much
because you care too much. People with Harm OCD who worry about harboring
a harmful identity or who worry about grotesque thoughts interfering with
joyfulness are people who are sensitive to the human condition. Learning to be
grateful that you are creative and compassionate and understanding that this
combo sometimes leads to you meandering into scary philosophical territory can
release you from the contract of self-criticism. It is in this state that we do our
best against the OCD.

CHAPTER 4
Fear of Harming Others
Most people do not spend their every waking moment worried about exploding
outward and destroying things in their path. It’s as if they know that any impulses
to act out in violent chaos will be automatically suppressed. In fact, they may be
so suppressed that they don’t even think they experience the impulses at all! (I
occasionally encounter people who claim they never think of turning their car
into oncoming traffic, but these people seem really peculiar to me.) What would
it be like not to have that resting sense of safety, not to have that confidence at
all? What would it be like to feel impulses that are anathema to your wishes and
at the same time feel absolutely no safety net besides sheer will? If you’re reading
this, you may already know.
Near the beginning of this book, I gave the example of Mandy, whose Harm
OCD started after learning about a violent crime. The thoughts bounced around
in her head starting with Why would someone do that? to Would I ever do that? to
What’s to stop me from doing that? Her compulsions ranged from mental rituals
aimed at proving that she would never act out, to avoiding triggers that made her
think about acting out, to seeking reassurance from various sources that she
would not act out. What was worse, when the obsession was at its most intense,
she could swear she felt a sensation in her hands that suggested she was about to
act out physically. This made being within reaching distance of another person
incredibly frightening. Sometimes she would sit on her hands, just to feel more
certain that she couldn’t use them for harm. Her daily life became a sort of
booby-trapped journey where every step along the way could be the step right
before doing something terrible. She also had to keep this a secret from everyone
she cared about. If they ever knew about the ticking time bomb she believed
herself to be, she imagined they could never love or trust her again.

There are a couple of different ways to look at this fear of loss of control and
impulsive harm. One theory suggests that these thoughts are normal responses
when people are provoked or their goals are obstructed—that these experiences
trigger aggressive fantasies but that people without OCD usually just disregard
them. The trigger could be something small, like learning you have to go to a
work meeting you’d rather avoid, but nonetheless it still produces these
meaningless violent thoughts (Riskind, Ayers, and Wright 2007). When people
with OCD become aware of these types of thoughts, they interpret them as
“motivated intentions” and then they feel they have to be certain that they are
under control (Aardema and O’Connor 2007). Think of the times you
wondered, Did that thought mean I wanted to do that horrible thing? This leads to
compulsive efforts to be certain you won’t harm anyone, which leads to worsened
obsessions. It’s important to understand that this does not mean you are a more
violent person. It means you are just more likely to become aware of naturally
arising violent thoughts than the average person.
Another theory suggests that, unlike contamination fears, these types of Harm
OCD fears are just autogenous, meaning they simply pop into your head and
bother you whether prompted by external events or not (Lee and Kwon 2003).
You get bothered by their presence, as opposed to them being present because you
became bothered. While these theories continue to be explored, it’s useful to
remember that understanding why the thoughts are there still doesn’t relieve you
of the actual problem of how to handle them in the present moment. The OCD
will often keep you focused on the task of trying to prove the reason the thoughts
are there, but this is a distraction from the only project that will really help you
overcome the disorder—accepting uncertainty.
Assessing for Safety
What will make me certain I will not engage in a violent act against another
person? This is a trick question because it asks for something that doesn’t
actually exist: certainty. We cannot know if or when we will do something
impulsively because, by definition, we can only know when an impulse is being
responded to, not before the impulse occurs. That being said, there are some

specific questions worth exploring with a mental health professional to assess for
safety when it comes to intrusive thoughts about acting out violently:
Do you have a history of engaging in violent acts? No, I’m not talking
about the time when you were a kid and you punched your brother
for breaking your favorite toy, or that time you tugged on the dog’s
leash a little aggressively when he wouldn’t obey your commands.
Rather, do you have a historical pattern of resolving your differences
through acts of violence?
Do your violent thoughts seem completely reasonable or, rather, do
they seem to conflict with your overall desires and sense of self?
Are you developing a plan to harm another person in a specific way
at a specific time? Mental healthcare providers in the US are bound
by laws stating that they have a duty to warn potential victims and
call the police if they believe a patient is going to harm another
person.
Golden and colleagues (2016) provide a case conceptualization of a woman
with fears of harming her husband. In addition to assessing her for homicidal
ideation with questions like those above, they also collected information from
family members who could objectively verify what she claimed. Because OCD
thrives on pairing the worst things you can think of with the people you care the
most about, it’s no wonder you want 100% certainty that your fears won’t come
true. But once essential questions have been asked and answered about your
intentions and plans (specifically, the lack thereof) to harm others, and the
diagnosis points to OCD, the next step is to take the scary leap of treating it like
it’s OCD even when some doubt remains.
Common Obsessive Thoughts in the Fear of
Impulsive Harm
What if I respond to an impulse to grab a weapon (or a device that
could be a weapon, like a pen) and use it on someone?

What if I push someone into danger (for example, off a train
platform)?
What if I lunge for someone’s throat or eyes?
What if I am suddenly inspired by something I see to commit a
violent act against someone?
What if someone causes me to become angry and my anger is
uncontrollably expressed through violence?
Common Compulsions in the Fear of Impulsive Harm
Reciting neutralizing thoughts or prayers to protect from hurting
anyone
Avoiding any TV or movies that have even the slightest amount of
violence in them
Hiding or disposing of any knives, scissors, or even pencils that could
be used as a weapon
Refusing to sit within reaching distance of people, in case you were to
lunge at them
Avoiding walking near people on the sidewalk, in case you were to
push someone into traffic
Reassurance seeking that you would never “snap” and harm someone
Confessing thoughts, urges, or perceived impulses to harm people
Reading and rereading articles on the Internet about why people
snap
Avoiding being alone with triggering people (anyone deemed a
potential victim)
Avoiding confrontations or people who may generate feelings of
anger

Engaging in safety behaviors to make it more difficult to act violently
(for example, locking yourself in a room away from others, wearing
thick gloves to impair the ability to grab things, or tying your hands
together)
In the guilty-pleasure horror film Bad Moon, a man handcuffs himself to a tree
during a full moon in the hopes that this will keep his inevitable transformation
into a werewolf from harming his family. It doesn’t really work (don’t worry, the
family dog comes to the rescue), but at least his heart’s in the right place. People
who struggle with this form of Harm OCD often imagine themselves being just
on the boundary between being “normal” and a transformation into a beast. The
experience is terrifying, like never being able to fully exhale because it might
throw you off guard and let the beast out.
But it doesn’t have to be this way. Scary as it may be to stand up to this fear of
impulsive harm, it is achievable if you implement the right tools. Let’s take a look
at how the principles of H.E.A.L. can apply.
H: Have Another Look
The hallmark of distorted thinking for the fear of impulsive harm is jumping to
unhelpful conclusions. The idea is, if you can’t guarantee that all of your impulses
can be controlled, then you assume that none of your impulses can be controlled,
meaning that the only moral position is to completely isolate yourself from any
person to whom you could cause harm. This is, of course, OCD nonsense. Most
people are only mostly in control of most of their impulses most of the time (he
writes, with a mouthful of doughnut). The OCD pushes you to make absolutist
conclusions based solely on your thoughts and feelings in a given moment.
Recognizing how the OCD twists the facts against you can give you the extra
space you need to choose not to do compulsions. Here are some examples of
what to look out for:
Thought-Action Fusion: Allowing these thoughts to go unresponded to makes me
more likely to act out violently. That’s an easy thing for OCD to say, but where is
the evidence? Since you presumably haven’t acted out up to this point,
entertaining the idea that you will if you don’t do compulsions is a choice.

Catastrophizing: I am going to snap and harm someone, leading to imprisonment or
death. Well, that’s a creative idea, but for now that’s all we know, that you’ve had
an idea. You can’t predict the future. By definition, the problem with acting
impulsively is that you can’t predict when an urge will overwhelm you into
action. Uncomfortable as it may be, we have to stay here in the present. But this
also means we have no business assuming that our fear of impulsive harm will
come true.
Discounting the Positive: This time my harm thoughts will come true. The universe
is constantly presenting you with reassuring information in the form of you not
having harmed anyone. The OCD wants to discount that information by saying
this moment is different. Though we can’t prove otherwise, we also shouldn’t
ignore the reality that contradicts it.
Tunnel Vision: I noticed that knife because I’m going to use it! Could be, or maybe,
more likely, you noticed the knife because you have an obsession with knives.
Emotional Reasoning: This tension and anxiety I feel means I am going to push
someone into the street. It’s unclear what our feelings are trying to tell us, if indeed
they are trying to tell us anything. Tension is tension. Thinking that tension is a
predictor of a feared act is adding OCD’s narrative to the equation.
Shoulds: I should always be confident that I can control my impulses. The trick here
is to notice the crafty language of your OCD. Impulses are, by definition,
experiences that come up out of your control. Responding to them is within your
control, but this has nothing to do with confidence. The OCD chips away at
your confidence to con you into doing compulsions.
E: Exposure and Response Prevention
Exposure and response prevention approaches to the fear of impulsive harm may
seem impossible. If I’m afraid of killing my wife in the middle of the night, how can I
do exposure to that without, um, y’know…? The key here is to recognize that the
OCD has you trapped in content (the scary words that make up your thoughts)
instead of the process of how you relate to those scary words. Exposing yourself
to these fears simply means putting yourself in situations where the fears are
likely to be present and practicing being there with them without doing

compulsions. In Harm OCD, it’s always a good idea to do a mix of in vivo
exposures (doing things that are triggering) and imaginal exposures (writing
scripts that are triggering). In his book Freedom from Obsessive Compulsive
Disorder, Jonathan Grayson reminds us that “falling within the OCD diagnosis
doesn’t mean you won’t engage in violence. Remember, the goal isn’t to be
reassured, but to take a risk” (2003, 203). In other words, ERP is about training
yourself to respond differently to your unwanted thoughts and to learn to live
without certainty, the way people without OCD do. First, let’s review the rules
again for effective ERP.
Important Rules for ERP
Don’t do exposure in a manner where accidental harm is likely to
take place. In the case of impulsive harm obsessions, a good example
of an unacceptable exposure would be holding a loaded firearm
without training and without the supervision of someone who is
trained.
You don’t have to violate your values in the name of ERP. If you
have a fear of shooting someone and part of your value system
includes being opposed to gun ownership, then buying a gun for
exposure purposes is not an acceptable ERP strategy because it
requires you to go against your values. Doing ERP with fake guns,
stores where guns are sold, media involving guns, and imaginal
exposures or scripts about using a gun are just as effective, if not more
so.
No testing. The purpose of ERP is not to prove that you won’t act out
and harm someone. The purpose of ERP is to learn to accept
uncertainty and to change the way you respond to your unwanted
thoughts about harm. Often this means paying attention to what you
are telling yourself during an exposure. Standing near someone on a
subway platform when you have a fear of pushing people in front of
trains is a good exposure. However, if you are simultaneously telling
yourself See? I’m not going to do it, then you are just doing an extensive
checking ritual.

In Vivo Exposure Tips
The key to in vivo ERP for fear of impulsive harm is doing everything you can
to eliminate the argument that you are incapable of causing harm. In other
words, by removing all the barriers to harming people, you insist that the brain
accept uncertainty. Some examples include:
Safely and legally carrying a concealed weapon (for example, a
pocket knife)
Chopping food or using a blender in the kitchen
Driving while allowing harm thoughts
Standing near people at the edge of a street or subway platform
Keeping hands out of pockets when alone with someone
Visiting a sporting goods store where you could buy a weapon
Watching movies with triggering scenes of spontaneous acts of
violence
Playing violent video games
All of the above are heightened in their effectiveness if done around triggering
people. If your Harm OCD focuses intensely on one particular person, such as a
spouse, then agreeing with your unwanted thoughts as exposure when in your
spouse’s presence can be very effective. Being alone with your spouse, and in
particular being alone in triggering environments, can also be helpful. For
example, you could go hiking with your wife in an area where a simple push
could bring your fears to life.
Acceptance and Motivation Scripts
This style of scripting helps prepare you for the big fight ahead with OCD.
Exposure to a fear of impulsively harming people means exposure to the potential
of impulsively harming people. We are usually taught to be less impulsive or to
take more care in our actions to avoid causing harm. But to overcome this form
of OCD, this learning has gone too far and needs to be scaled back. Recognizing

that your efforts to be certain you won’t harm anyone will always fail to satisfy
the OCD means you can start investing in life instead of living in fear. Start by
addressing what you are going to do that the OCD won’t like, and then describe
how this makes it possible that your fears could come true. Then identify what
you think is likely to happen if you try the impossible task of getting certainty
that all of your impulses are controlled. Lastly, consider what it is you really care
about that would make you take this risk of getting better.
An Example of an Acceptance and Motivation Script: “I’m going to start
spending more time in public settings. I’m going to stop avoiding situations
where I might be alone with people. I’m going to stand near people on the
subway platform. This lack of vigilance in compulsive avoidance could leave
me vulnerable to an impulse that causes me to harm someone. I may push
someone off the subway platform and kill them. I may have to be
institutionalized or put away for being a danger to society. But if I continue
to obey my OCD, I will become increasingly isolated and continue to
convince myself that I am a ticking time bomb. I will cut myself off
completely from those I love and will fall into a pit of depression and
confusion. I still won’t know for sure whether I might snap and hurt
someone. I value being a social person who can shake hands and network
and bring people together. I am an affectionate and loving person and if it
takes having thoughts about hurting people to be able to get close to them,
then I choose the thoughts over the avoidance. I choose life over servitude
to OCD.”
Flooding Scripts
Remember that this style of scripting is designed to get you thirsty for
compulsions. It is that thirst that you are trying to master because quenching it
with rituals is taking too much of what you care about away from you. A good
way to do flooding scripts for a fear of impulsive harm is to describe the
consequences of letting the impulses win. The more detail you can use and the
more specific you can be about the victim(s) of your violent crime, the more
powerful this exercise can be. The example below may be immensely triggering

for some readers, so please proceed with caution. That being said, consider that I
wrote this with a cat in my lap.
An Example of a Flooding Script: “I can’t take it anymore. I decide to start
agreeing with the thoughts and realize more and more that doing whatever I
feel like in the moment is fine by me. I get the thought about stabbing my
wife, so I get up and go down to the kitchen to get the biggest knife we have.
I clutch it tightly in my hands and take it up to the bedroom. My wife is
sleeping comfortably in the bed. I walk over to her and abruptly plunge the
knife into her chest. It is harder to get the knife in than I thought, so I have
to push hard on the handle to get past her sternum and cut all the way
through to the mattress beneath her. Her eyes shoot wide open and she
screams. It takes a few seconds for her to realize that she has been stabbed.
She looks at me in horror. She tries to speak, but blood just pours from her
mouth. Her eyes tell me she always knew I was going to do it and her last
thought is anger at me for deceiving her this long. Blood vessels in her eyes
begin to burst and then I see her pupils turn gray. I step away, blood all over
my hands, and begin to realize what I have done. I feel horrible. I want to
take it back, but I can’t. I pick up the phone to call the police and confess. I
struggle to hold the phone because my hands are slippery with my dead
wife’s blood. I dial 911 and say, ‘I killed my wife. It was me. I did it.’ The
police come and arrest me. I am given life in prison and spend the rest of my
days alone in a cell thinking about what I could have done to avoid
snapping. I never get a satisfying answer and my entire existence is made up
of the repeated image of my knife plunging into her flesh.”
Okay, that was intense, I know. Take a few deep breaths and acknowledge that
you just did something courageous. Letting yourself be in the presence of such
terrifying and grotesque thoughts is going to generate some notable discomfort.
Remember that using a technique like this in your fight against OCD means
choosing to get in the ring with discomfort and learning to make space for it
without compulsions.
A: Acceptance and Mindfulness

Mindfulness for the fear of impulsive harm means learning to observe the rising
and falling of impulses and thoughts about impulses as they occur organically. We
may not like it, but as human beings, we naturally have violent impulses that rise
within us. Typically, we trust that a mechanism in our brain can quickly assess
when to actively suppress an impulse and when to essentially ignore it. OCD
interferes with that trust and tries to task you with the ultimate responsibility of
perfectly assessing and judging everything that looks like a violent impulse. So
the first thing to remember about being mindful of this kind of Harm OCD is to
be mindful of the brain’s natural process of allowing impulses to rise and fall
without being acted on. This requires staying present with those impulses (or
with what look like impulses to you) and resisting the urge to neutralize them
prematurely with compulsions. Instead, let them come and go without
compulsions and view them simply as objects of attention passing by. When you
do this, you are likely to become aware of commentary in the mind, things like, If
you let yourself feel this any longer, you’re going to snap, or, You are being reckless and
irresponsible by allowing this impulse to go unchecked. Simply note that these are
thoughts and let them come and go. They are like the little fish that clean the
sharks as they swim by in the aquarium. Notice them and let them keep
swimming.
It’s very common for people with this manifestation of Harm OCD to worry a
lot about the distinction between an unwanted thought and an urge. The OCD
may try to bully you into seeking certainty by demanding that you review your
experience over and over again, collect reassurance from others (or the
Internet), and be perfectly satisfied that your thoughts are not urges or desires.
Try to remember that this futile quest for certainty is just more thinking about
your thoughts and feelings. It doesn’t lead to freedom from your obsession. The
problem here isn’t a lack of information. It’s not the content of your thoughts,
but the activity of thinking that is getting you stuck. Mindfulness asks that you
simply note the “thinking” and allow it to be as it is.
Another aspect of mindfulness for the fear of impulsive harm is observing that
you have a marvelously creative mind. So in addition to being mindful of the
natural rising and falling of violent or pseudoviolent impulses, you want to also
view these entire stories, these new and exciting ways of hurting people that your
OCD comes up with, as objects of attention. Though they do not reflect your

identity or your morals and they are not predictors of your behavior, these
thoughts are nonetheless your thoughts happening in your mind. Viewing them as
the mind simply wandering into peculiar territory, as it often does, will keep you
in command of your OCD and less likely to respond with compulsions.
In meditation, you may quickly notice that resting your attention anywhere
seems to bring out a whole lot of demons in the mind. Don’t be too distracted by
the gory or horrific nature of the images that pop up in these quiet moments.
View them as challenges to acceptance and let them be ideas that you are willing
to make space for. You may be resting your attention on the breath and then your
mind naturally wanders off (as it is inclined to do) and then you find yourself
attending to an image of a loved one being violently harmed. You may
instinctively want to analyze it and make sure you are disgusted by it enough, or
maybe you want to flee from it and block it out with some happy thought. This
state is called being distracted. All you need to know about the violent thought is
that it is not your breath. Then return to the breath. Remember, meditation is
the development of this skill—knowing when you are distracted by your thoughts
and feelings, and returning to the present moment without conditions or
compulsions.
L: Love and Self-Compassion
It’s essential to remember that OCD uses self-criticism as a tool. It’s not some
incidental thing, as if people with OCD are too hard on themselves for no
reason. Rather, OCD thrives on compulsions, and compulsions are strategies for
reducing the discomfort you have with your unwanted thoughts. By pushing your
buttons, OCD manipulates you into thinking you need to self-soothe with
compulsions. One way it does this is by repeatedly shining a light on your least
self-loving ideas. You’re disgusting for thinking this. You’re a monster for even
wondering about this. And so the OCD wears you down and makes compulsions
seem inevitable. Again, by countering this with self-compassion, you can take the
power back from your OCD.
Remember, like it or not, your mind takes you to some wild places. So why not
like it—or at least respect it? Instead of hating yourself for thinking and feeling
like you could harm someone, why not embrace this creativity? Viewing your

OCD as something trying to entertain you, instead of something trying to destroy
you, can be an act of self-love.
Using the tenets of self-compassion described in chapter 2, you can construct
coping statements to help you resist compulsions: mindfulness (acknowledging
that you are having the thoughts and feelings that you are having); common
humanity (reminding yourself that other people have similar experiences); and
self-kindness (reminding yourself that there are plenty of things you are doing
right and that you can cut yourself some slack without doing compulsions).
An Example of a Coping Statement: “I’m having intrusive thoughts about
hurting people at this family picnic and I’m feeling afraid and guilty. Many
people with OCD struggle with these kinds of thoughts, and even people
without OCD would find this kind of mental imagery upsetting. I’m doing a
decent job recognizing that this is OCD and trying my best not to give in to
compulsions. I need to give myself permission to have these kinds of
thoughts and choose to let them come and go as best I can while I invite
myself to engage with others at this picnic.”
You’re Not Crazy
It’s easy to underestimate the amount of strength it takes to live with the
fear of impulsive harm in OCD. Each day can feel like a game of Russian
roulette wherein you are constantly asked to pull the trigger on your life,
and though all you ever get is a click, it always feels like the next one will be
the bullet. The truth is, with the right treatment, you can regain confidence
in your ability to assess how seriously you should take unwanted violent
thoughts. You may come to realize that thinking the way you do is more like
having a great horror novelist in your head than it is like being some kind of
loose cannon. Who knows, you may even learn to appreciate the novelist in
your head instead of devoting precious time and attention to condemning it.
Recap

H: Have Another Look. Distorted thinking leads you to the false belief that the
presence of any individual thought or feeling is a sure sign that you are going to
hurt, or are capable of hurting, someone, and that you need to avoid or neutralize
such thoughts in order to keep a violent act from occurring. Recognizing these
thought traps for what they are can help you to resist compulsions.
E: Exposure and Response Prevention. It’s scary stuff, but it works. Done well,
in vivo exposure to situations where impulsive acts of harm could do some real
damage can be very effective. Gradually working your way up a hierarchy of
feared situations while resisting safety behaviors can put you back in command of
your OCD. Watching or reading stories about snapping and writing scripts about
losing control and hurting others and having to cope with the consequences can
free you from your fear and teach you that you really are capable of accepting
uncertainty about your violent thoughts.
A: Acceptance and Mindfulness. The better you are at observing what’s on the
screen of your mind, the easier it is to see obsessive thoughts, feelings, and
impulses about harming people as background actors in an otherwise watchable
movie of your life. Remember that thinking about the difference between
unwanted thoughts and “urges” is still just more thinking. Getting into the
meditation process when you have Harm OCD can be scary. Don’t be
discouraged when your early experiences with it include closing your eyes and
seeing a lot of carnage.
L: Love and Self-Compassion. You have so much compassion for others, you
even worry about harm that hasn’t happened to them! Syphon off some of that
compassion and turn it inward. If the OCD can’t tear you down with name-
calling and shaming, then it leaves you in a position to fight this thing and win it.

CHAPTER 5
Fear of Self-Harm
Many people with Harm OCD suffer intensely trying to cope with the
uncertainty about whether they would or could harm another person. One
compulsive strategy for relieving this anxiety might be to avoid the target of your
unwanted thoughts, avoid the people you fear harming. But what if it were truly
impossible to avoid that person? What if the imagined victim is you?
You’ve probably been asked before, “What’s the worse that can happen?” and
your response left the asker sorry to have asked! Living with OCD often means
being frustratingly aware of the worst that could happen in a given situation.
This naturally lends itself to intrusive images of reckless disregard, such as
jumping off of things, spontaneously cutting or hitting yourself, grabbing a
handful of pills, and so on. Anyone with OCD is likely to come up with these
kinds of fringe ideas when prompted (or when not prompted). It’s one of the
things you’re really exceptional at: noticing the fringe! But when the content
relates directly to your specific obsession, it’s hard to view this thinking style as a
skill set.
Intrusive self-harm thoughts in OCD may be more pronounced when one is
faced with stress, unwanted obligations, shame, and so on. So in some cases they
may present themselves as frustrating magnifications of negative thoughts about
yourself (similar to other violent thoughts that naturally arise toward others in
frustrated states, as discussed earlier). But in most cases of self-harm OCD, these
thoughts intrude independently from any depressive symptoms or other cues that
would make one wonder about suicidal thoughts. In other words, they are totally
ego dystonic intruders (that is, they don’t line up with your identity as you
understand it), and part of what makes them so upsetting is the random nature of
the intrusions.

Fear of violent self-harm often connects with a fear of emotional harm to
others, so it isn’t far removed from the fear of harboring a harmful identity
discussed in chapter 3. You may obsess about hurting yourself in part because you
know how devastating it would be to those who care about you. Having this
power to ruin not only your own life, but the lives of everyone around you, can
be overwhelming. What if I did it? What if I just turned my car into oncoming traffic?
What if I just cut my throat right here in this moment, without provocation, for no
reason at all? What if I just eliminated myself, leaving my loved ones alone to fend for
themselves in perpetual misery? Strategies to prove that you won’t harm yourself
can lead to extreme avoidance and failure to function. If anything can be used to
harm yourself, even your own hands, how can you ever feel truly safe? Safety in
this context is not the absence of danger. Safety is the emotional state you find
when you are able to rest your attention in uncertainty and live meaningfully
without proof of the absence of harm. But when OCD demands certainty that
you are safe from harming yourself, it can make an argument that any state of
being alive represents a danger. You get stuck in a loop. Prove that you will stay
alive, but eliminate all aspects of life that could be threatening? Impossible!
Near the beginning of this book I gave the example of Elizabeth, who got stuck
on the thought that she could jump out of a window and then later obsessed
about harming herself through poison and other means. Step by step she stripped
away all of the things from her life that scared her, but this meant stripping away
all of the things that made her really value life in the first place. She then gets
trapped in the OCD argument that life may not be worth living, which then
becomes a trigger for fearing that she could harm herself. If you, like Elizabeth,
struggle with self-harm thoughts, you may have spent a long time feeling like
you’re never free to fully relax, because your mind tells you that at any moment,
you could snap and kill yourself. It can be pretty isolating. If you try to talk about
it, people may assume that you’re suicidal (and you’re not always sure that you’re
not). Let’s look at some basic concepts for assessing any reasons for concern
beyond OCD.
Assessing for Safety

There is a natural tendency in OCD treatment circles to view the content of
thoughts as meaningless. There’s good reason for this. Thoughts are only
thoughts; it is our reaction to them that causes problems. That being said, we
therapists perk our ears right up when we hear the words, “I’m having thoughts
of harming myself.” It’s just something we have to deal with as humans because
most of us live in a society where we naturally care if another person lives or dies.
But therapists go through a lot of training that focuses on determining whether
or not a client is safe and whether or not we might need to intervene to keep the
client safe. It may come as no surprise that being an OCD therapist with OCD
makes this aspect of my profession somewhat daunting. When I hear “I am
having thoughts about hurting myself,” I want to know almost as much as my
client does whether or not we’re really talking about OCD. No individual facet of
the following questions necessarily means cause for alarm, but exploring each of
these with a mental health professional is an important first step. The idea is to
build a three-dimensional picture of your mental and emotional status wherein
the therapist, as an outside observer, can make an educated assumption about
your safety.
Do you have a committed desire to harm yourself, and if so, what is
your specific reason behind it?
Do you have a specific plan for harming yourself?
Is there a specific point in time you imagine doing this?
Do you have a history of attempting self-harm or suicide, and if so,
what were the specifics of those attempts?
Have you been recently exposed to a traumatic event?
Are you severely depressed or bipolar?
Do you take medication, are you taking it as prescribed, and have
these thoughts coincided with any recent changes in your
medication?
If you answered “yes” to any of the first three questions, better to go to your
nearest emergency room, and then deal with any OCD that may also be involved
after you are safe.

The Suicide Compulsion?
Most of the OCD sufferers I have met, with or without Harm OCD, describe
having at least some thoughts about suicide. Though suicide is an important risk
factor specifically for people with harm OCD (Ching, Williams, and Siev 2017),
sometimes the suicide thought is not so much intrusive as it is just a place the
OCD sufferer directs his attention to as a strategy to avoid thinking about an
obsession. With all of these bright lights shining on terrible thoughts, one can’t
help but wonder what it might be like if all the lights were turned off. If you
imagine a world where you don’t have any unwanted thoughts, then naturally
there is only one world that fits that description: death. So you might have found
yourself compulsively thinking about suicide in order to avoid thinking about
another obsession. This may also be looked at as a form of self-reassurance from
imagined future guilt, as in “If these thoughts come true, I’ll just kill myself.”
It cannot be stressed enough that proper assessment of the manner and
intention behind suicidal thinking should take place at the beginning of
treatment, as well as at various points throughout treatment. A professional
mental health provider should carefully examine the way you respond to your
thoughts and help you sort out what you believe about the thoughts and their
power to lead you to self-harm (Golden et al. 2016).
People sometimes withhold discussion of intrusive self-harm thoughts out of
fear of being hospitalized against their will. This is an understandable concern,
but the best way to address it is to establish trust between you and the therapist
through honesty and open dialogue. The more directly you articulate the content
of these thoughts and how you relate to them to your therapist, the better the
therapist will be able to assess your safety.
Common Obsessive Thoughts in Self-Harm OCD
I may snap and impulsively
cut myself with a knife
hang myself
turn my car into oncoming traffic

jump off a ledge or out of a moving car
shoot myself
poison myself
overdose on my medication
I may become suicidal by
being alone for too long
letting myself experience sadness or stress
letting myself be exposed to things that are upsetting
letting myself feel less than perfectly in control
Common Compulsions in Self-Harm OCD
Avoiding physical triggers
Weapons or potentially dangerous objects, chemicals, or pills
Ledges that could be jumped from
Driving
Avoiding triggering emotional states (for example, anger, sadness,
lack of control)
Thought neutralization (replacing self-harm thoughts with other
thoughts)
Mental rituals designed to make you feel certain that you won’t harm
yourself (for example, repeating a list of reasons you want to live,
counting, excessive praying)
Mental analysis of why you would never harm yourself
Checking to make sure you feel safe or in control
Checking to make sure you have not done something to harm
yourself or have done enough to protect from harming yourself
Seeking reassurance from others, the Internet, or self-reassurance,
including confessing thoughts to elicit commentary that you are safe

Avoiding all references to suicide in media (for example, music by
artists who have committed suicide, movies with scenes related to
suicide)
The OCD wants you to devote your life to making sure you don’t lose your life,
by accident, out of impulse, or with intention. But efforts to be certain you will
not harm yourself always end up fueling greater doubt in the end and only result
in doing more compulsions. If you are desperately trying to prove that you won’t
harm yourself, your brain can only conclude that you are unsure about your
safety and that intrusive thoughts about self-harm are automatically important.
Let’s take a look at HEALing ways to stand up to this kind of Harm OCD.
H: Have Another Look
Like the fear of impulsive harm toward others discussed in the previous chapter,
fear of impulsively harming yourself can be intensified by faulty thinking about
the significance of your triggers. Remember, the OCD “wants” you to think of
compulsions as necessary, not as optional. Recognizing how the OCD is
confusing you on this issue is one way to overcome it.
Thought-Action Fusion: If I allow this thought to go unchecked, it will make me
more likely to commit suicide. Remember that thoughts are not physical objects
that stack up and create mass. There is no limit to the frequency or number of
times you have a thought where it automatically stops being just a thought and
definitely starts being a predictor of behavior.
Catastrophizing: If I go to the roof, I will jump to my death. It’s ironic that the
OCD says in one breath that you need to be extravigilant because you can’t
predict if you might snap and lose your life and then in the next breath tells you
to avoid engaging with life because of the prediction that you will snap and cause
harm. Lose-lose. Remind yourself that the future is unknown, and ask yourself if
there is something on the roof that you want.
Discounting the Positive: This one thought about self-harm feels real and all the
other ones before it were just OCD. It’s always “this time,” so don’t let your history

of being able to keep yourself safe get tossed away over a momentary thought or
feeling.
Tunnel Vision: Robin Williams committed suicide so anybody can at any moment,
including me. Other people who are not you, going through life experiences that
you are not going through and making choices that you have not made, are not a
reason to condemn yourself to being a slave to OCD. Notice that you notice these
stories above all others because that’s what your OCD does.
Emotional Reasoning: I feel nervous, therefore I cannot be trusted around this knife
not to cut myself. Remember that you often feel nervous or guilty for literally no
reason other than that this is what it feels like to have OCD. How you feel is not
a reliable indicator of what behaviors you will choose.
Shoulds: I should never have a thought about harming myself. Remember here that
the problem with the “should” is that it takes basically healthy ideas and makes
them so rigid that you cannot tolerate them. There are certainly better ways to
spend your attention than on your unwanted suicide-themed mental junkmail.
But given that self-harm exists in the known universe, it makes sense that you
may think of it from time to time. Barring yourself from having any kind of
thought is the best way to invite more OCD into your life.
E: Exposure and Response Prevention
Exposures to your unwanted self-harm thoughts and to things that could
potentially be used to cause yourself harm can be very effective, especially if they
are things you are likely to encounter in your life anyway, such as knives.
Reducing unnecessary or excessively compulsive safety behaviors can also play an
important role. As discussed in the previous chapter, there are three essentially
important rules that must be respected in doing this kind of ERP.
Important Rules for ERP
Don’t do exposure in a manner where accidental harm is likely.
An example of unnecessary risk here might be stepping over a
guardrail at the edge of a cliff and standing there with your arms

outstretched and your eyes closed. It hopefully goes without saying
that hurting yourself is not how you overcome a fear of hurting
yourself, and neither is putting yourself in situations where you are
likely to be hurt. Fear is overcome by learning to live with
uncertainty.
You don’t have to violate your values in the name of ERP. For
example, if you have a fear of harming yourself by losing control
while under the influence of alcohol and your value system doesn’t
include drinking, then it is better to use imaginal forms of ERP.
No testing. The purpose of exposure is not to prove to yourself that
you won’t hurt yourself. It is to prove that you are capable of sitting
with uncertainty and investing your attention in more than just your
OCD. Though it may seem logical to push a knife against your skin
to see if you would “really” do it, this behavior is actually compulsive
certainty-seeking, and compulsions make OCD worse. Testing
compulsions can also lead to accidental harm and values-opposing
behaviors, violating the rules mentioned above.
In Vivo Exposure Tips
Everything that follows assumes that you have been properly assessed for
suicidality and are not at meaningful risk of self-harm according to a professional
evaluation. I use the word “meaningful” here only to emphasize that uncertainty
is pervasive and we all have to make space for the possibility of being wrong.
REMOVING SAFETY BEHAVIORS
If you have hidden the knives or pills or other instruments you imagine
harming yourself with, get them out in the open. Remember, teaching your brain
that you can be in the presence of these thoughts without doing compulsions is
how you get better. It follows then that doing things that bring these thoughts to
the forefront and then resisting compulsive response to them is an effective
OCD-fighting strategy. You may want to start by simply putting things you’ve
hidden back where they belong (for example, putting pills back in the medicine
cabinet). Taking the ERP challenge a step further, you might put them on your

nightstand or kitchen counter in plain view (assuming this is otherwise safe and
not risking children accessing anything dangerous). Similarly, you might practice
keeping a pocket knife with you, parking on the top floor of a parking structure,
or leaving belts or ropes lying about, depending on what kind of thoughts your
OCD likes to bully you with.
BRING ON THE THOUGHTS
Your OCD is a dictator and, like all dictators, it is insecure. It wants to control
what you watch, what you listen to, and what you talk about so you don’t get any
“ideas” about freedom from oppression. Watching movies where characters
commit suicide, listening to music by artists who have committed suicide, and
reading books and articles about suicide (without seeking reassurance) are all
good exposure strategies. If holding something like a knife also brings on the
thoughts, then do so, but remember that any sort of exposure in this style should
not be used to test what will happen. You need to be able to sit with the thoughts
of “I might do it.” Exposures like these should be first practiced with the
guidance of a professional.
LEARN TO BE ALONE
You may fear that if you are alone, your harm thoughts will overwhelm you and
you may use the presence of others as a form of reassurance that you are being
monitored and can’t hurt yourself. Gradually increasing your exposure to being
alone can be really scary. However, it can also be really effective and a way to
reacquaint yourself with what makes you, well, you. Binge-watch Netflix, cook
yourself chilaquiles, wear slippers, sing and dance to your favorite songs. In other
words, practice being free and being “okay alone” even with your unwanted
thoughts. ERP does not necessitate being miserable.
Acceptance and Motivation Scripts
If you have this self-harm form of OCD, you have to deal with two competing
and yet equally nasty voices in your head. One tells you that you’re going to harm
yourself even though you don’t want to. The other one tells you that living this
way is unbearable and the only way out is probably suicide. These are not two
voices truly, but two tones of voice that the OCD uses to keep you enslaved.

Overcoming self-harm OCD means choosing to release yourself from the
contract to find certainty and instead investing in the real life you actually do
have. For this script, start by acknowledging that you’re giving up the quest for
certainty and some (or all) of the behaviors that go with that. Then describe
what you might be risking in making this choice. Be brief, but be direct about the
fact that you may harm yourself (remember, this is part of the exposure). Then
describe what you think your life will look like if you devote it entirely to proving
that you won’t harm yourself. What kind of life will that be? Lastly, reflect on
what makes this fight so worth it.
An Example of an Acceptance and Motivation Script: “I am going to stop
trying to prove to myself that I won’t commit suicide. I am going to stop
avoiding knives and will start doing exposure to them and using them in the
kitchen. I am going to start listening to Nirvana again and accept that this
may come with thoughts of hurting myself. This may result in me losing the
plot and deciding in a split second to harm myself. This could happen by me
slitting my wrists, and my family may find me in a pool of blood in the
bathtub. Because if I continue to obey my OCD and keep trying to get
certainty about my harming thoughts, I will continue to isolate myself from
society. I will keep avoiding knives and music and other things that bring
about the thoughts, but this will just make the thoughts more intrusive. I
will spend every waking moment in my head trying to prove that I won’t
hurt myself and I will still fail. Eventually, unable to function, I will probably
become massively depressed and may even become truly suicidal. I was
taught to love life and to cherish the moments we have on this earth. I value
being a loving wife and mother. I want to be present for my child as he grows
up and not always in my head. It’s worth it for me to take the risk of stopping
compulsions and accepting uncertainty because OCD simply does not offer
me the life I can have.”
Flooding Scripts
As with the fear of impulsively harming others, a good way to get into the ring
with your self-harm OCD is to describe your fear coming true in detail and try to
sit with the experience without doing any mental rituals to self-reassure. The

more brutal and direct you can be, the more impactful the script may be. Just
remember that the aim is to get yourself into a fearful state where you become
aware of the urge to do compulsions and you resist that urge. Don’t fall for the
trap of rationalizing throughout your script and using it to prove that your fears
won’t come true. As always, use it to prove that you are capable of being in the
presence of fear without compulsions. The following may be considerably
triggering, so proceed with caution.
An Example of a Flooding Script: “I drive to the top of the parking
structure and get out of the car. I go to the edge by the railing and look out
on a view of the entire city. I climb over the railing and let my toes dangle
over the edge. I look down several hundred feet to the sidewalk. I close my
eyes and start to lean forward. Eventually, gravity takes over and my body
tips and falls over the edge and begins to plummet toward the earth. I can
feel the air in my face as I careen toward the ground. I feel confused, like I’ve
made a terrible mistake but like I’ve been finally freed from my burdens at
the same time. The ground draws nearer and then my body crashes into the
unyielding concrete. The bones in my skull, back, arms, and legs are all
crushed. A pool of blood forms around my body. I am not dead yet. I feel
incredible pain from every nerve as the darkness slowly swallows me. I made
a mistake. I want to take it back. It hurts so much. People are screaming.
Some people come over to see and gasp at the horror. I can’t see, but I can
hear. Then I can’t hear. Then I can’t feel. Then I am gone. After I pass, my
family is informed and they are devastated.”
A: Acceptance and Mindfulness
Being mindful of unwanted self-harm thoughts means giving yourself enough
distance from problem solving and thinking to be able to observe the thoughts
forming, demanding attention, and then passing. If you incorporate meditation
and other forms of mindfulness training into your treatment, you may improve
your ability to be a nonjudgmental observer of these thoughts and be able to
return your attention to the things you care about in the present moment, and
not just to your obsessions. If you are new to meditation, don’t be surprised by a

sudden heightening of your unwanted thoughts when you sit and practice. The
first step to meditating is often asking yourself to rest the attention on the breath.
For people with OCD, this often gets interpreted as “Don’t think harm
thoughts,” which makes such thoughts more likely to intrude. The key to
meditating effectively and developing your mindfulness skills is simply to be
aware of the rising and falling of your self-harm thoughts and to consistently
begin again by returning your attention to the breath, again and again.
But don’t leave this just for meditating. Remember, meditation is the practice
of an exercise, but learning to map this onto your daily life is the key. In other
words, by positioning yourself as an observer, not a victim, of your thoughts, you
can engage in the things you value, recognize the self-harm intrusions as simply
thoughts, and return from their distraction without having to engage in rituals.
L: Love and Self-Compassion
Self-harm OCD can come at you from multiple angles at the same time. It says
that you will hurt yourself when you don’t want to. But thinking about hurting
yourself all day is likely to make you unhappy. It doesn’t have to if you can view
thoughts as meaningless objects of attention, but we’re not born naturally adept
at this. We’re born to seek out threats to ourselves and eliminate them, perhaps
even if the so-called threats are just our thoughts. Never forget how brave you
are for living with OCD and trying to cope with someone in your head that keeps
threatening to kill you.
This means that to be self-compassionate about self-harm obsessions, you have
to start by understanding that this really just is hard. You may think of yourself as
weak or foolish for worrying about your intrusive harm thoughts. Or maybe you
think you’re crazy or going to lose it. The truth is the opposite. You’re not crazy.
By recognizing how much of you there is to love, you simultaneously create an
environment where your OCD is just OCD, your thoughts are just thoughts, and
your ability to overcome your challenges is without limits. Interacting
compassionately with your mind means talking to yourself as you would to a good
friend. Teasing is allowed as long as it isn’t mean-spirited. If you can use humor to
relate to the darkest of thoughts, you can help yourself through the darkest of
times.

As always, when constructing self-compassion coping statements, try to think
about the most honest description of what’s happening. It isn’t necessarily the
happiest, but it also should be void of criticism. Acknowledge that you are having
the thoughts and feelings that you’re having. Recognize that others do (or at least
would) find these thoughts and feelings difficult to contend with. Then invite
yourself to recognize your strengths and your ability to exert those strengths
against the OCD.
An Example of a Coping Statement: “I’m having a lot of intrusive thoughts
today and I’m afraid I’ll snap and hurt myself. Many people would find
thoughts of self-harm disturbing and be frustrated by them intruding. I’m
doing a decent job of resisting overt compulsions right now. I need to give
myself permission to view this as something I’m still working on and invite
myself to write an exposure script and then reward myself for the hard work
with a good jog.”
You’re Not Crazy
People get self-harming thoughts. Sometimes they manifest as a response to
internal desperation. Sometimes they manifest as a fantasy of not having to
think horrible thoughts. Sometimes they intrude for literally no reason other
than that you have OCD. Obsessing about self-harm is no weirder or less
treatable than obsessing about germs or anything else. Remember that the
OCD wants to isolate you from others and tells you that you’re different, so
that you continue to work for it like a slave. Learning to stand up against
this bully and fight for your peace of mind takes great strength. If you’re
reading this, then you have this strength.
Recap
H: Have Another Look. Having unwanted thoughts of self-harm does not
automatically mean you are in danger. OCD uses trickery to push you into
assuming the worst. Stepping back and noticing that you are being tricked by the

way in which you look at these thoughts can give you the advantage you need to
choose not to do compulsions.
E: Exposure and Response Prevention. Self-harm exposures are scary, but then
so are all exposures. In vivo exposure to being around things you imagine you
could harm yourself with, and eliminating safety behaviors, can put the OCD in
its place. Writing scripts about harming yourself can also be very effective, but be
on the lookout for mental rituals or rationalizations that might render them less
impactful.
A: Acceptance and Mindfulness. Admitting to yourself that these are the
thoughts that are going through your head can often feel like a major exposure.
But learning to be a better nonjudgmental observer of your self-harm thoughts
can help you see them as objects of your attention, not threats to your safety.
L: Love and Self-Compassion. OCD does its best to make you hate yourself and
then tells you that you are more likely to commit an act of self-harm because of
these hateful feelings. Approaching yourself with love, compassion, and a sense
of humor (even dark humor), can help you turn the tables on your OCD.

CHAPTER 6
Fear of Harming Children
It’s commonly understood that OCD goes after the things we love the most.
When we worry and obsess about harm coming to people in our lives, we worry
first about those closest to us. Then we divide people into degrees of perceived
vulnerability. We worry hardest about those whom we are charged with
protecting and keeping safe. OCD going after your children can be tragically
debilitating. How can parents connect to the joy of parenting if they cannot feel
at peace in the presence of their child?
It’s totally unfair. It takes so many effortful commitments to get to the place in
life where you can call yourself a mom or a dad, and then right at the moment
when you start to truly appreciate how amazing that is, OCD swoops in for the
kill (as it were). It may not come as a surprise. If you’ve been living with OCD for
some time, you’ve likely seen it go after your relationships, your sexual
orientation, your health anxieties, your sense of safety regarding germs,
chemicals, or people in general.
Harm thoughts in mothers can start even before a child is born, manifesting as
obsessive concerns about harming the pregnancy or intrusive thoughts of self-
harm. Postpartum OCD (where symptoms appear within a month of giving birth)
is also common, and if you don’t already have a history of OCD, it can appear to
come out of nowhere. Changes that take place in the female body during and
immediately after pregnancy have a wide range of potential effects on one’s
mental health and emotional stability. It is unclear why some people see a
notable increase in their OCD symptoms during and after pregnancy and some
people don’t (or even see the opposite). What we do know is that when
postpartum OCD occurs, it most often manifests as unwanted intrusive thoughts
of aggression against the child (Abramowitz et al. 2003b).

Whether you are a mother or father, the OCD can steal your attention with
“Will I really do it?” thoughts. It may seem impossible to accept uncertainty that
you could harm your child, through negligence or some kind of crack in your
morality. But recall from the discussion in chapter 2 that uncertainty reigns
supreme, even in things we care the most about. You may be so consumed by
your fears of harming your children that you overlook the actually harm caused
by obeying the OCD. For example:
Lack of physical affection due to fear of contact
Lack of physical presence due to avoidance
Lack of mental presence due to being “in your head” all the time
Conflict between you and your coparent due to anxiety and the
imbalance in parental involvement
Lack of healthy bond between parent and child due to association of
child with mental anguish
The list above is not meant to make you feel guilty, but angry. Near the
beginning of this book, I used the example of Richard, who was plagued with
intrusive images of shooting his infant son. You may find yourself wishing for
some other kind of OCD. There is a sense of “No, not this, anything but this.”
Perhaps it is because you know that you will probably always have your child in
your life, so you imagine being unhappy indefinitely unless you get certainty
about the thought. Or maybe you think that your thoughts about children are
representative of the worst kind of person one could be, and the guilt and shame
this induces makes it uniquely overwhelming.
Assessing for Safety
Revealing that you have intrusive thoughts about harming a child can be
terrifying. Treatment professionals in the US are mandated reporters by the state
in which they are licensed. This means that they are required by law to contact a
child services agency when there is a reasonable suspicion that a child is in
danger. The word “reasonable” is left up to the professional to determine. You
may fear that your child is in danger just because of your thoughts, but in fact the

opposite is true when you have Harm OCD. Your fear of causing harm to your
child makes you overprotective or avoidant, which is a completely different
problem. Questions that need to be explored carefully with a treatment
professional include:
Do you use physical discipline in your household, and if so,
specifically how?
Have you ever physically harmed a child intentionally?
Do you have a history of committing acts of violent aggression?
Do your unwanted thoughts present themselves as thoughts,
commands, or voices?
Again, no individual answer to the above questions is an automatic deal
breaker, but a careful examination of the answers may be important. Given the
delicate nature of these types of discussions, it is extremely important to make
sure you are being assessed by a treatment provider who specializes in OCD and
knows what to look for.
Common Obsessive Thoughts in the Fear of Harming
Children:
What if I kill or physically harm my child by stabbing, shaking,
strangling, smothering, drowning, disposing of him in the trash, or
placing her in a harmful situation?
What if I “snap” and go crazy, or respond to an unwanted impulse
that leads to attacking my child?
What if I harm my child by being willfully or accidentally negligent in
a safety measure?
What if I may have harmed my child and don’t know it or blocked it
out somehow?
What if I will never be comfortable with, or will always resent, my
child, and associate him or her with these harming thoughts?

What if I harm my child by being inappropriate with him or her,
sexually or otherwise? (Note: This book is primarily focused on the
fear of violent harm, but sexual obsessions are also common in OCD
and may share territory with harming thoughts.)
Common Compulsions in the Fear of Harming
Children:
Avoidance of:
being alone with children
bathing, dressing, changing, and so on
triggering imagery associated with children
schools, parks, and other places children may be present
household items that could be used harmfully (knives and so
on)
objects that are imagined to be harmful or that could be
harmful if left unattended or misused (for example, small
items that could fall to the ground and be accidentally
ingested, bug spray or cleaning chemicals that could be
inadvertently spread to surfaces)
triggering media (news articles about child harm, movies
with related themes, and so on)
Mental review and other mental rituals to address:
Did I touch my child in an inappropriate way?
Did I feel an urge to hit or otherwise act aggressively toward
my child?
Reassurance seeking and confessing:
Reporting to significant other that you “may have touched”
somewhere or done something inappropriate
Reporting to significant other that “bad thoughts” occurred

Asking others if triggering behaviors, thoughts, or events are
“okay” or normal
Researching stories of people who have caused harm to
children to ensure there are no similarities with yourself
Excessive researching of laws and regulations about child
safety
Self-reassurance (for example, “I would never harm my child
because…”)
Repeated checking to make sure no harm has been done
OCD loves new material and children are, well, new material. One of the
deceitful ways the disorder can get you on the hook is by emphasizing the
vulnerability of children or the vigilance you need to keep them safe. Fears of
harming children are no different from fears of harming anyone else, but even
admitting this feels like a risky stance to the Harm OCD sufferer with kids. When
my first child was born, I thought it quite hilarious that within seconds of her
arrival, she was placed before me on a tray and a doctor put a sharp pair of
scissors in my hand. It was to cut the umbilical cord. I had an advantage over
potential Harm OCD with my children, which is that I always knew full well that
I would have intrusive violent thoughts about them. Because I always assumed
I’d have thoughts of cutting, smothering, strangling, microwaving them, and so
on, I never responded to any individual thought of that nature like it was
particularly interesting. If anything, I welcomed such thoughts as useful
reminders of why I became a therapist. Let’s take a look at how you can apply the
principles of HEAL to this form of Harm OCD.
H: Have Another Look
No, you’re not going to think your way out of your Harm OCD, but if you can
recognize the way you are thinking about your experience and challenge yourself
to approach that experience more rationally, it may help you resist compulsions
and allow for needed uncertainty. The OCD takes so much, and now it wants
your children. Here are some ways it tries to manipulate your thinking to get you
to give in:

Thought-Action Fusion: Allowing violent thoughts about my children means I am a
bad person, and that makes them more likely to be harmed. This idea captures both
the morality and probability thinking errors. Thoughts are not actions and
confusing the stream of nonsensical data in your mind with moral failing is a
distortion cause by your OCD.
Catastrophizing: If I am left alone with the child, I will harm her. It is
understandably scary to admit that you can’t predict the future, but it remains a
fact. Don’t let your OCD get away with making you think that avoidance of the
future is some kind of moral mandate. Remember, “I can’t predict the future,
but…” can be answered in many ways.
Discounting the Positive: I could snap at any moment and harm my child, and this
moment could be the one. Sure, it could, but this is an ineffective way to pay
attention. People who don’t act on their unwanted thoughts tend to continue not
acting on their unwanted thoughts.
Tunnel Vision: I was tense when I strapped my crying child into his car seat and this
means I could have abused him. Any parent without OCD will tell you that you
can’t sweat the small stuff. There are just too many variables to contend with
regarding children and you can’t let every single thing be a catastrophe in your
mind. OCD wants you to be overly concerned with everything even remotely
related to harm fears because it is always building its case against you.
Emotional Reasoning: I feel disconnected around my child and this means I may not
love him enough to keep from harming him. Since it is impossible to know for sure
why you feel anything in any moment, and it is even more elusive to try to make
sense of feelings you are checking for, it’s better not to use feelings as evidence of
potential harm.
Shoulds: I should only have peaceful and loving thoughts toward my children. Like all
“should” statements, this sounds like a nice idea. But actually, you “should” have
a wide variety of thoughts about your children, especially when putting them to
bed!
E: Exposure and Response Prevention

The fight for freedom is staged on the battlefield of ERP. The tendency for people
who suffer from this form of OCD is to fear ERP as much as they fear their
thoughts and feelings. It may seem to you like you are experimenting on your
children, putting them at unnecessary risk—even by allowing yourself to “go
there” and think those thoughts. But remember the rules of ERP and you’ll see
things more clearly.
Important Rules for ERP:
Don’t do exposure in a manner where accidental harm is likely to
take place. If you have a fear of harming your child through
negligence, an exposure may be to limit the number of times you
check to ensure that her car seat is properly buckled. Maybe you
even allow yourself to be distracted by singing a song while you do it.
But you don’t intentionally leave it unbuckled.
You don’t have to violate your values in the name of ERP. As
discussed above, you don’t actually put children in harm’s way to do
exposure, but this can be tricky when your harm fears are more
abstract. Maybe you are afraid you’ll harm your child by exposing him
to inappropriate material. The solution to this might be exposure to
things slightly out of your comfort zone, but not if they actually go
against your values as a parent.
No testing. In the case of obsessions about harming children, a good
example of an unacceptable exposure would be briefly holding a
pillow over a child’s face while she sleeps to prove that you would
never push down hard enough to harm her. Even if this causes no
actual harm, all it really accomplishes is an added layer of shame
about the depths you went to for extreme checking compulsions (not
to mention the horror you would both feel if the child woke up in the
midst of this). As always, it’s essential to remember that the endgame
is changing your relationship to uncertainty.
In Vivo Exposure Tips:

Watching films or reading stories that involve the subject of harming
children
Volunteering for diaper duty and bath time and allowing the harm
thoughts to be present
Preparing meals for your children with knives
Engaging in arts and crafts with the use of scissors or other items that
trigger unwanted thoughts
Spending time alone with your child or taking him out to a park, for
example, and letting the unwanted thoughts join you
Resisting confessing or seeking reassurance from your partner (or
others) about the thoughts and purposefully telling yourself that you
are hiding something dangerous
Allowing children to be unattended when appropriate and accepting
thoughts of harm that may befall them
Notice that most of the exposures that are going to be effective for treating
your fear of harming children actually amount to simply living your life in
accordance with your values, but doing so with the intentional invitation of your
unwanted thoughts. Exposures that also have an inherent value (for example,
you and your kid made art out of strips of paper you cut with scissors) are going
to be both more effective and more likely to be repeated than exposures that
simply generate anxiety.
Acceptance and Motivation Scripts
It can be hard to find the motivation to stand up to OCD when you feel
completely crushed by it. And again, something about children being involved
makes it even more difficult to imagine overcoming. Using an acceptance and
motivation script to build up the nerve and get your feet wet may be useful. Start
by describing what exposures you’re going to do and/or what things you are going
to stop avoiding. Then do your best to describe what this really means you are
risking. Don’t just say “and my child may die,” but dig a little deeper into what it
is you are afraid might take place because you didn’t do your compulsions. Then

try to paint a vivid image in words that captures your life completely enslaved by
the OCD. Lastly, explore the kind of parent you believe you are (or could
become) and how fighting your OCD is the most consistent action with that
value.
An Example of an Acceptance and Motivation Script: “I’m going to start
being alone with my child again and putting her to bed at night. I am going
to allow my harmful thoughts to be there while I do this and I am going to
stop confessing to my wife and stop asking her if everything is okay. This may
result in me reacting spontaneously to an impulse and throwing my child off
the balcony to her death. This could devastate me, my wife, and our
extended family, and I could spend the rest of my life in prison or a mental
institution. But if I don’t make these changes, I am not going to have a
relationship with my child. She will only know a father who is avoidant and
distant, and will conclude that I don’t really love her. I will spend all of my
time ruminating on whether or not I am going to harm her and I will never
conclude that she is safe. It’s worth it to me to stand up to my OCD and
demand that my child be mine, not the OCD’s. I am an attentive and loving
father and if having these thoughts and taking this risk with her is what it
takes to be there for my baby, then so be it.”
Flooding Scripts
Dark and deep waters lay ahead, so proceed with caution. Remember, flooding
scripts are about generating the urge to do compulsions and resisting them.
These thoughts are going through your head anyway, but what you are doing in
this type of exposure is writing them out and magnifying them with intention.
This means getting face to face with the feelings of harm. Use this approach as
mortal combat for your OCD.
An Example of a Flooding Script: “I bathe my son in the tub and decide I
don’t want to be a parent anymore. He looks up at me helplessly, his head
resting in my palm. I remove my hand from the back of his head and place it
on the front of his face. I push his face under the water. He starts to gasp,
then twitches violently. He grabs at my wrist, desperately trying to stop me,

but he is too weak. I take my other hand and make sure he can’t slip out
from under me. He twitches a few more times, then stops. He is dead. I
killed him. I drowned my baby. My husband walks in moments later and sees
what I’ve done. He screams and cries and keeps saying ‘How could you?
What have you done?’ I am speechless, dead inside, a zombie. My husband
lifts my baby’s lifeless body out of the water and tries CPR but it is too late.
He calls the police and tells them what happened. When they arrive, they
look at me with disgust before taking me to the police station and arresting
me.”
Still here? That was brutal, I know. You may be feeling sick to your stomach or
like you want to jump out of your skin. That’s perfectly normal. Remember that
those who have this form of OCD are responding to this feeling with
compulsions. The purpose of a script like this is to expose oneself to this feeling
and to learn how to be better at having it so it doesn’t control your behavior.
A: Acceptance and Mindfulness
Children are really good at being in the present. They’re also really good at
demanding that you be in the present, even when you want nothing more than to
check out, check your phone, browse through a newspaper, and so on.
Developing the skill through mindfulness to actually stay present with children,
even when your mind keeps highlighting intrusive thoughts of harming them, is a
worthwhile and achievable endeavor.
The first thing to remember about this form of OCD is that the horrible and
disgusting “abnormal” thoughts are actually totally normal. The problem has to
do with how the thoughts are presented and how they are responded to, not with
their existence or absence. The OCD mind is a wide open mind, highlighting
extreme potentials in any given context. To cherish something (like a child) is to
also be aware of the horror of losing something that you cherish. In other words,
as an OCD sufferer, you can’t not think about this stuff. The problem is that you
mistake the simple awareness of this thought for having an intrinsic meaning,
instead of just being a mental event that comes with having an OCD mind.
Therefore mindfulness, the skill of observing mental events without judgment or
analysis, is an essential aspect of mastering the disorder.

The brain records actions much more clearly than thoughts, feelings, or
intentions. What this means is that the parent who changes the child’s diaper
while having intrusive thoughts about committing some vile act in the process is
actually recording more helpful information than the parent who is avoiding
changing the diaper and the intrusive thoughts. The person who allows the
thoughts but not the avoidance is actually programming the brain to perceive the
thoughts as irrelevant and the value of the interaction as the most important
element. The avoidant person is establishing only that diaper-changing is a
threat. One way to keep this concept in mind is to remember that your brain
doesn’t know that you have OCD and always assumes that your behavior is
rational. Therefore, what you avoid is always going to be understood as a danger,
whereas what you do exposure to will eventually be understood as
nonthreatening.
Developing a more accepting and mindful perspective involves stepping back
and opening up to your experience. You can have an unwanted thought and also
notice the other details about what is going on. Let yourself view the fearful
harming thoughts as just one data stream among many and don’t single it out for
special attention. Between you and being the mom or dad you want to be is just
thoughts and feelings. Let go of resistance to thoughts and feelings and create
pathways in the mind that allow the worst of the worst to pass through relatively
unnoticed. Then you get the good stuff. The giggles, the hugs, the I-love-you’s…
and even the unpleasant stuff becomes okay, too. You get back the freedom to be
angry without debating in your head what that means, to wake up in the middle
of the night to whining and demands and think to yourself, Man, I’m gonna kill
that kid! without it having to mean anything at all. This freedom is ultimately
what allows you to be present with your child.
L: Love and Self-Compassion
Being a parent is hard. It’s way harder than people assume it will be before it
happens to them. It causes stress, overstimulation, sleep deprivation, and worst of
all, the sense that people are watching to see how good you are at it and how
good a person you are in general. It may seem as if people care about you more,
focus on you more, now that you are responsible for children. And children will

press your buttons and try to make you frustrated, because making you anything is
fascinating to them. But what your children can’t understand yet is that if you
have OCD and you’re stressed, exhausted, frustrated and overstimulated, your
disorder flares up. And when your disorder flares up, it targets everything you
care about the most and tries to bind it to a living nightmare.
This disorder can trick you into thinking you’re the worst of the worst. But you
are not the best or worst parent who ever lived. You are just a person with
thoughts, feelings, and sensations. Remember, being self-compassionate mostly
just means being honest. When you make a mindful statement about fearing
harming your children, you are being honest about your experience. When you
criticize yourself for having thoughts and for being afraid, you are essentially lying
to yourself about what is evident. You have OCD. Commentary about how good
a person you are is a distraction from the important work of keeping your OCD
from commandeering your family. Similarly, it’s important to remember that all
healthy parents have “unhealthy” thoughts about their kids and have doubts
about their abilities to raise them. They’re supposed to. Treating yourself fairly
and compassionately is the only rational way to navigate parenthood, with or
without having OCD.
An Example of a Coping Statement: “I’m afraid to be left alone with my
child because I’m having intrusive thoughts about shooting him. Many
people with OCD have these types of thoughts and struggle to be alone with
their kids. I’m doing a pretty good job of recognizing my OCD in this
moment. I need to give myself permission to be afraid sometimes that my
thoughts are dangerous. I can have these feelings and still resist the urge to
avoid my son. Maybe I can focus on some activities for us to do together that
I will enjoy even if my OCD is giving me a hard time.”
You’re Not Crazy
Most people say “I’d do anything for my child,” but the Harm OCD sufferer
has to do more than just show up for the job. You have to show up to this
amazing beautiful being even knowing that it aggravates your disorder. You
have to do exposure to the darkest, most terrifying corners of the mind. You

have to cope with extreme love, often reminding you of extreme fear. You
have to tolerate the uncertainty that your child may have a short or painful
life in order to maximize the possibility that she has a happy one. To love
your children is to be vulnerable to them and to see their vulnerability. You
have to risk being harmed and you have to risk harming in order to be close
to anyone. OCD can make you think you’re too crazy to deserve this
closeness with a child. But you’re not crazy. You got this.
Recap
H: Have Another Look. The OCD uses cognitive distortions to trick you into
thinking you have to do compulsions to keep a child safe. But presence, not
perfection, is what makes for good parenting. Challenging distorted assumptions
can keep you focused on the most important task of resisting compulsions.
E: Exposure and Response Prevention. Exposures don’t put children at risk.
What they do is empower you to fight your OCD. It is compulsions that take you
away from being the kind of parent you want to be. Removing unnecessary safety
behaviors and writing exposure scripts can train you to overcome your fears.
A: Acceptance and Mindfulness. Learning to make space for gruesome and
terrifying mental imagery about your kids is no easy feat. However, by practicing
staying present with children and with the thoughts that they trigger, you weaken
OCD’s grip on your attention.
L: Love and Self-Compassion. Recognizing that parenthood is hard and, well,
“crazy-making” at times is an important first step in treating yourself with
compassion. The better care you take of yourself, the better able you will be to
stand up to your OCD when it targets your children.

I
PART 3
The Bigger Picture
n part 1, I offered an overview of OCD and its relationship to unwanted
thoughts about harm and violence, as well as the various treatment
approaches you can take to overcome it. In part 2, I went into more depth
on some common ways Harm OCD manifests and offered some tips for using the
principles of H.E.A.L. In this final section of the book, I will focus on how to
maximize your potential for mastery over Harm OCD, including how to get help
and how to better help others help you. This part is divided into two chapters,
“Harm OCD and Everyone Else,” which covers accessing treatment and
involving your loved ones, and the concluding chapter, “Harm OCD and You,”
which focuses on rising above shame and self-stigma for true mastery, with a look
at what recovery really is.

CHAPTER 7
Harm OCD and Everyone Else
The problem with thoughts you find repugnant, and learning to cope with them
in the most therapeutic way, is that one of your hardest exposures is often the
first thing you have to do to get better. In other words, though many people have
a variety of obstacles in front of them when seeking professional help (for
example, geography, finances, social stigma), those with Harm OCD seeking help
are faced with the task of telling another human being the content of their
thoughts while simultaneously perceiving that sharing these thoughts could lead
to all kinds of actual harm. Harmed if you do, harmed if you don’t.
Admitting that you have thoughts about stabbing your infant daughter or that
you have thoughts about the possibility that you might have killed a stranger
with your car, or that you have thoughts that you may at any moment put a
bullet in your head for no reason is, well, not an easy hello. So to begin, offer
yourself some respect for the courage it takes to actually give voice to these
horrifying thoughts.
Getting Professional Help
The best way to ensure the start of a healthy path is to seek out an evaluation
from a mental healthcare provider who specializes in OCD. You can go to
https://iocdf.org/find-help/ (the treatment provider page of the International
OCD Foundation website) and put in your geographic and other search
parameters as one way to locate a potential provider. On that website, you can
also find a good list of questions to ask a treatment provider in order to be
confident that he or she knows how to evaluate for and treat OCD. Before
committing to an appointment, call the person and talk to him or her plainly
about what you are experiencing. Something like, “I am having trouble with

unwanted intrusive thoughts about harming. I don’t want to do anything bad and
the thoughts scare me because I worry about what they mean.” Let the person
you are speaking to ask some clarifying questions. Try your hardest to resist
reassurance-seeking right there on the phone.
I do not recommend leading with “I have Harm OCD.” Though I and many of
my colleagues would immediately know what you mean, many therapists are not
trained to label OCD subtypes. This is not necessarily a bad thing. They could be
experts in OCD and simply be committing to a more technical clinical
description (for example, “OCD with aggressive obsessions”). Subtypes like Harm
OCD (and HOCD, ROCD, POCD, and so on) are convenient shorthand, but
often lead to unnecessary diagnostic confusion. OCD is obsessive-compulsive
disorder. The specific content of your thoughts and the specific rituals you
engage in to get certainty about those thoughts is what guides the treatment, not
what determines the diagnosis. The diagnosis is determined by the presence of
obsessions, compulsions, and impairment.
Some Useful Questions to Ask:
How much of your practice is made up of OCD patients?
What treatment approaches do you use? (CBT and ERP are what
we’re looking for here, not dream analysis)
Have you ever treated people with unwanted intrusive violent
thoughts?
Many OCD specialists do not take insurance and many in-network therapists
are not trained in CBT for OCD. But this is not a hard-and-fast rule, so asking
questions like those above is worth your time even if the therapist is not calling
him- or herself a specialist. If you are seeing a therapist who is not a specialist in
OCD, this doesn’t mean he won’t be able to help you at all. Perhaps he has had
some training in CBT for OCD, but his practice simply isn’t made up of a
majority of OCD patients. That being said, it’s reasonable to be skeptical of any
therapist’s ability to properly assess OCD, particularly when it involves violent
obsessions. One study of mental healthcare professionals found that the overall
rate of misdiagnosis for taboo thoughts was in fact generally higher than when

assessing for contamination obsessions (Glazier et al. 2013). So the more upfront
and direct you are about the content of your thoughts and how you experience
them, the better able you will be to determine if the person you’re speaking to
can be helpful with his or her treatment approach.
Arm Yourself With Knowledge, But Don’t Weigh
Yourself Down
Regardless of what type of treatment provider you decide to see and to what
extent they may be a specialist in OCD, it’s never too early to start educating
yourself on the disorder. This will also help you speak about it with the therapist
in a way that gives him or her the most useful information. In addition to reading
this book, I recommend checking out several of the books listed at
https://iocdf.org/books/. Blogs, online support groups, and YouTube series (for
example, The OCD Stories) can be useful as well. Before treatment, the OCD
knows more about you. It knows how much anxiety and guilt you are willing to
tolerate, it knows who you fear harming the most and how, and it knows how to
get under your skin and press your buttons. You need to know more about OCD
than OCD knows about you.
Just be careful not to use information gathering as a form of compulsive self-
reassurance. Knowing where the line separates the two isn’t always easy, but one
of the biggest pitfalls I see clients struggle with in the early part of their treatment
is overresponding to doubt about the diagnosis. For many, hearing that they have
OCD is a huge relief because it sounds like they don’t have what their OCD
keeps saying they have. (Bloodlust? Murderous impulses? A cold heart?) But
setting out to be 100% certain that you have OCD can easily become an all-
consuming OCD symptom of its own and, at its worst, can interfere in your
willingness to take the risk of investing your time, energy, money, and faith in
treatment. So yes, read the OCD books and learn from OCD specialists and your
fellow sufferers, but don’t make needing to know for certain that you have Harm
OCD into a replacement obsession.
Medication and Harm OCD

Your first interaction with a treatment provider may be a psychiatrist—a medical
doctor trained in the diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders. The
psychiatrist may recommend medication as part of your overall treatment plan.
Though it is clear that certain medications help many people with OCD in some
meaningful way, exactly how much of OCD can be explained as a neurochemical
problem is unknown. The decision to take medication for OCD may be
challenging, but it’s important to understand that taking or not taking
medication has nothing to do with fighting OCD the easy or hard way. A proper
evaluation from a psychiatrist can help you make this determination, but
especially for those with more severe symptoms, medication may be an important
part of the treatment.
The most commonly prescribed medications in this context are called selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), and they are typically prescribed at high
doses when used to treat OCD (Kellner 2010). In fact, to this date, SSRIs are the
only class of medications that have been documented to be effective on their
own for OCD, though other medications, such as neuroleptics, may also be used
to augment or enhance the effects of these medications (Hirschtritt, Bloch, and
Mathews 2017). When effective, medications for OCD can help reduce the
intensity of thought intrusion and associated anxiety, making it easier for
sufferers to make noncompulsive choices. The key thing to remember here is that
with or without medication, it is still you making the choice not to do
compulsions and to accept uncertainty about your harm thoughts.
Taking medication as part of your treatment for the fear of causing harm can,
in and of itself, be a challenging exposure. The OCD will tell you that taking
psychiatric medication somehow makes you more of a, well, psychiatric patient,
which comes with a type of self-stigma that isn’t helpful. Make the determination
based on careful consultation with the prescribing doctor, not on subjective
assessments of how crazy you think you have to be to get whatever support is
available.
For a basic primer on OCD meds, check out https://iocdf.org/about-
ocd/treatment/meds/
Harm OCD in Children

This is a book for adults with Harm OCD, but I wanted to include a little
information about children with Harm OCD so that any readers who may know
of a child with this form of OCD can be supportive. OCD overall affects roughly
1-2% of children (Rapoport et al. 2000). Children who don’t have OCD are also
grappling with new and sometimes frightening concepts every day in multiple
environments, so it should come as no surprise that children who do have OCD
can be significantly impaired by their OCD symptoms at home, in school, and in
their social life (Piacentini et al. 2003). Given the content of these types of
obsessions, one might assume they only occur to adults, but in fact taboo themes
of violence, sex, and religious sacrilege frequently come up in pediatric OCD
(Masi et al. 2005). Aggressive obsessions may range in prevalence from 32.6-75%
of children with OCD (Storch et al. 2008).
If you are a parent reading this, don’t worry about whether you caused this by
allowing them to play the wrong video game or watch a movie above their
maturity level. (Note to self: Ask wife if eight-year-old is ready for Gremlins.)
OCD is not typically understood to be caused, but manifests as a combination of
genetic and environmental factors that are not easy to predict. Harm-related
thoughts may be especially potent with children because of their general lack of
exposure to violent concepts and their deficit in being able to make sense of
them in an otherwise safe environment. I’m not suggesting that you present a
child with material that is not age appropriate, just that you understand that
children may struggle with thoughts they have yet to find a place for in their
child minds.
Sadly, research indicates that children with Harm OCD tend to be more
impaired by their symptoms than children with other obsessions (Storch et al.
2010b). It isn’t hard to imagine that many children may avoid disclosing their
harm obsessions, both out of shame for having them and out of fear that they will
be misinterpreted. It follows, then, that keeping the content of their obsessions to
themselves is likely to make the OCD worse, teaching the brain that their
symptoms really must be shameful or dangerous. While some may hide their
symptoms, other children with Harm OCD may engage in ritualistic reassurance-
seeking, desperately trying to draw from others confirmation that these thoughts
are just OCD and not signs that they are bad seeds (Wu and Storch 2016). In
either case, if you are a parent or other loved one of a child with Harm OCD,

remember that normalizing these types of thoughts is an important part of
creating a safe place to address them and easing the child’s burden.
What Parents Should Know
Violent obsessions in children with OCD often target the parents. After all,
the loss of a parent may be the most terrifying thing a child can conjure up. Don’t
be surprised by the seemingly “grown-up” content of your child’s obsessive
thoughts. If children know what a knife is, they know what a stab is and the
more concern you give the content, the more compulsive they will be with it.
Getting your child proper treatment is extremely important and, as discussed
above, it is well advised to put in the effort to find an OCD specialist. A child
with intrusive violent thoughts may be easily misdiagnosed by a well-meaning
therapist unfamiliar with Harm OCD as having been the victim of some kind of
physical abuse or exposure to inappropriate material. This can lead to burdening
your child with extremely triggering questions about domestic violence or worse,
leading to misguided reporting to child protective services.
Treatment of Harm OCD is not meaningfully different with children than with
adults. In both, the key is collaborating with the therapist on effective exposures
and systematically reducing avoidance and other compulsions. But children with
OCD may need more help understanding why this would work, and extra time
may need to be taken to get them on board with treatment. Discussing the
rationale for exposures may be especially important when treating children with
Harm OCD because both the child and the parent may fear that ERP is too
dangerous or risky (Johnco and Storch 2017).
Disclosing to Family Members and Friends
There are two kinds of people in your life when you have OCD: people who are
wrapped up in it and people who aren’t. People who are wrapped up in your
OCD spend a lot of time with you, witness you doing rituals, take your
reassurance-seeking questions and confessions, and generally spend some
significant portion of their time trying to keep you from freaking out (usually
with only limited success). Sometimes these people are also the ones your OCD
says you might end up harming. These people are your partners, your parents,

and sometimes your closest friends. These people should take priority when it
comes to disclosure of your Harm OCD because these are the ones who are best
suited to help you when they have the right information—and also the most
likely to make your OCD worse when they have the wrong information.
What you want out of disclosure is someone to truly hear you. It’s not about
pity (in fact, most people with Harm OCD whom I have encountered seem
disgusted by pity). It’s about remembering that you are not alone in this universe,
but are part of a larger system. Changes you make in your relationship to OCD
will bring about changes in the people around you. Changes in the people around
you will influence the way you relate to your OCD. Here’s a simple way to think
about how to disclose when you are asking for a kind EAR.
E: Educate
Rather than barrel into “I have Harm OCD and can’t stop thinking about
murder!” start by educating the person you are disclosing to about OCD in
general. You have obsessive-compulsive disorder, a condition where you struggle
with unwanted intrusive thoughts and get stuck in a loop when you try to get rid
of them. Share some information about the disorder from an article or book on
the subject. Set a solid platform of understanding about OCD before going on to
the next phase of disclosure.
A: Articulate
Now that your trusted collaborator is thinking about you in the context of
having OCD, you can get more specific about the content of your thoughts. This
is, of course, especially useful to treatment providers because they will be
collaborating with you on the most effective exposures for treating your
obsession. With loved ones, articulating the content may be less important.
However, it may be helpful to at least articulate some of it so that they
understand why you seem to get triggered in some observable situations and not
others (for example, while watching the news). Consider that by doing this, you
give yourself a little bit of a buffer from questions they may ask that you’d rather
not answer in the middle of an anxiety attack.

R: Recommend
Once you’ve educated them on OCD and articulated your unique experience
of having OCD, you can recommend strategies that they can employ to help you.
Helping you doesn’t always mean helping you with treatment or exposures. It can
also mean giving you space when you need it. For a more comprehensive
exploration of the issue, you might encourage them to read When a Family
Member Has OCD (Hershfield 2015).
Don’t expect to immediately feel better after disclosure. For many, disclosing is
like donating a kidney. Sure, it’s for a good cause, but the recovery can be pretty
painful. You may feel particularly vulnerable with your “secret” out. No matter
how gracefully people receive your disclosure, don’t be surprised when self-
criticism and shame roll in. Your OCD may tell you that you’ve made a terrible
mistake or that people think horrible things about you. Get ready to implement
some heavy self-compassion strategies in response. It’s worth it in the long run.
When you avoid disclosure in situations where it would really benefit you, that
shame train still arrives right on time. The pain you think you’re avoiding just
gets turned inward and creates more self-doubt and self-judgment in the end.
How Your Family Can Help
Getting others on board can be instrumental in overcoming Harm OCD. The
two best things a family member (or any trusted love one) can do to help you
with your Harm OCD is to stop reassuring you and to stop facilitating avoidance.
Of course, this all depends on you and your willingness to invite them to do this.
What needs to be done is for you to form an alliance with others against the
OCD. The OCD tries to drive a wedge between you and the other people in your
system, tries to isolate you in order to maximize its bullying. With others on
board with you against the OCD, you stand a better chance. This way, if the
OCD tricks you into asking for reassurance, your loved one can be there to
correct the experience. “Sorry, that sounds like reassurance. Can’t answer.”
“Contracts” are particularly useful, with or without the guidance of a therapist.
If you can articulate how your loved ones can help you resist compulsions, and
they can understand this, it’s helpful to have an actual document to refer to
where this is laid out. In terms of reassurance, you can collaborate with your

family members on the best ways to reply when you are having a difficult time
resisting asking those compulsive questions.
SAMPLE REASSURANCE CONTRACT:
My OCD makes me worry a lot about harming. To make myself feel safe from
harming, I may try to ask you to reassure me that I would not commit harm.
Though it will make me feel better in the short term to hear you say
something reassuring, this only strengthens my OCD. Instead of reassuring
me, I want you to tell me that you won’t answer my questions about harming
and that you’re standing with me in my struggle against OCD.
You 
can 
modify 
this 
however 
you 
see 
fit, 
including 
additional
recommendations for how your family members can deny or interfere in your
reassurance-seeking. You probably don’t want untrained family members
pretending to be your therapist and throwing exposure opportunities at you
randomly. But they can still discourage your avoidance by repeatedly inviting you
to participate in activities they would otherwise be doing (including cooking with
knives, watching that show with all the gun scenes, or taking that hike down the
secluded trail where their murdered body is unlikely to be found). Loving
someone is learning to be just a little okay with the possibility of killing them.
Otherwise you won’t spend enough time at harming distance to know what true
love is.
Except for That One
Let’s be perfectly honest, not everyone in your system is adept at contributing
positively to it. We all have our own issues and sometimes another person’s issues
may get in the way of supporting you in yours. Use your best judgment to assess
the people you care about for their competency to support before asking them to
handle this delicate material. This doesn’t mean you have to cut anyone out of
your life, but only you know who is likely to be a good part of your support team
and who is likely to make things worse. Some qualities to look out for might be a
tendency to overreact, to categorically reject mental health issues, to change
stories about you into stories about them, and above all, any history of using your
personal information to shame you. You don’t need more of that.

Disclosing to Anyone
The important thing to remember about disclosing Harm OCD is that what you
see in your mind is different from what other people see in their minds when they
hear about it. When you have Harm OCD, you feel as if you are in the horror
movie. But to everyone else, a description of unwanted harm thoughts is just a
screenplay of that horror movie. The content you describe may or may not
accurately depict what you’re thinking, but even if the image that comes up in
the mind of the person you’re disclosing to is worse than what you are trying to
describe, the interpretation of that image is likely less impressive.
Consider how you feel about other people’s obsessions. You struggle with
unwanted violent thoughts, so what do you really think about people who obsess
primarily about germs? You probably have empathy for them, but imagine that it
can’t really be that bad. I mean, it’s not violence, right? If you get sick, you get sick,
but if you kill a school bus full of children…Okay, that escalated quickly.
So this is the double-edged sword of disclosure. The people you are disclosing
to are unlikely to fully appreciate the pain you are in because they just can’t
imagine taking thoughts like these as seriously as you do. On the other hand, this
also means that the average person is unlikely to overvalue your unwanted
thoughts and judge you harshly or think of you as a horrible person for having
the thoughts.
So Why Tell Anyone?
First, it’s important to consider that anything you do to treat harm thoughts as
somehow different from the other nonsense in the mind leads the brain to
conclude that harm thoughts are special. We don’t want harm thoughts to be
special. So if you are a person who typically shares meaningful truths about your
life experience with people, but go out of your way to keep only these types of
thoughts a deep, dark secret, you feed the OCD’s lie about the special nature of
harm thoughts. Remember, the way you overcome any kind of OCD is by
learning to treat your thoughts as simply thoughts and being willing to live with
uncertainty about their meaning. So disclosing your Harm OCD in some
circumstances can be looked at as a type of exposure, not just because it’s scary,
but because it helps you practice treating the thoughts like they are less special.

Of course, when I speak of disclosure, I am not referring to compulsive confessing
of your thoughts aimed at getting reassurance. Instead, I mean sharing
knowledge about your condition, your inner world, with people of your choosing.
You’re Not Crazy
Whether you have intrusive thoughts of harming other people or of harming
yourself, your mental health affects those around you. Therapists who do
CBT are there to help, medication is there to help, and individuals in your
family system are there to help, too. But reaching out for help from any of
the above requires courage. I’m not going to lie to you right here and say
that everyone gets it, because they don’t. Not everybody understands you
and your Harm OCD, but that’s not because you’re crazy. It’s because they
are uneducated. Educating yourself is the first step toward educating others
and building a team of support. This is the fight of your life, so never forget
that anything you do to defy the OCD, including reaching out for help, is a
power move, not a sign of weakness.
Recap
Reaching out for help isn’t always easy, but finding the right
treatment provider can be important. Medication isn’t for everyone,
but it can be a useful tool in managing your symptoms.
Harm OCD can manifest in children even though the content of
violent thoughts can seem very mature.
Disclosing to loved ones and soliciting their support can be a valuable
part of your treatment, and using the principals of EAR (Educate,
Articulate, and Recommend) may help.

CHAPTER 8
Harm OCD and You
How long were you experiencing OCD symptoms before you picked up this
book? Six months? A year? Five years? Well, if you’re beating yourself up for not
looking for help sooner, you’re not alone. The average span of time between
onset of symptoms and actually getting help for OCD is over ten years (Grant et
al. 2006). The number-one reason why people put off getting help is that they are
ashamed of the intrusive thoughts. If you struggle with moral obsessions,
including Harm OCD, you may be more affected by shame and fear of being
stigmatized than those who struggle with other types of obsessions because you
may fear being looked at by treatment providers (or others) as deviant (Glazier et
al. 2015). I wanted to end this book with a discussion about shame, because
learning to step through shame is the most powerful tool you can develop for
mastering Harm OCD. Why? Because as it turns out, the strongest predictor of
quality of life with OCD is not how bad your OCD symptoms are. It’s how much
shame you experience having OCD (Singh et al. 2016).
Shame and Harm OCD
So what is this thing, shame? Shame can be understood as a negative assessment
of your whole self, as opposed to a negative assessment only of something you
did. Guilt is “I did something bad,” while shame is “I am bad.” In some studies,
roughly half of those diagnosed with OCD reported shame for having it and
shame for needing help (Williams et al. 2011).
Throughout this book, I have focused primarily on the fear of causing harm
and the guilt that people with Harm OCD have over these intrusive thoughts
and imagine they would have if their thoughts came true. However, to truly
tackle Harm OCD, it’s important to recognize the role that shame plays as well.

When you struggle with unwanted thoughts of violence, you may also struggle
with unwanted thoughts about who you are in the first place. Who thinks this
way? What kind of person am I that I think this way?
TAF + Shame = More Compulsions
As discussed in chapter 2’s list of cognitive distortions, believing that having a
thought is akin to doing a bad thing—a distorted way of thinking that confuses
mental behaviors with actual ones—is called thought-action fusion (TAF)
(Shafran, Thordardson, and Rachman 1996). If you struggle with this thinking
error, you may have come to believe that having the intrusive thoughts implies
something bad about your moral character (TAF-morality). One study found that
if people are prone to experiencing shame, struggling with TAF-morality means
that they are more likely to engage in compulsions (Valentiner and Smith 2008).
Take a moment to consider what this really means. Your brain tricks you into
thinking that having a “bad” thought is the same as doing a bad thing (thought-
action fusion) and you may already be wired for this to be viewed in terms of
morality (TAF-morality). So you have an unwanted violent thought and you feel
as if you’ve already committed an immoral act simply by having the thought. If
you are also a person who is likely to condemn your whole character for being
imperfect, then the thought/perceived act becomes a shame-producer.
Compulsions, therefore, are strategies for escaping the severe emotional pain of
shame. So learning to be shame-resilient is a smart way to take away Harm
OCD’s sharpest weapon.
Shame Resilience and Mindfulness
Brene Brown defines shame resilience in her book Daring Greatly as “the ability
to practice authenticity when we experience shame, to move through the
experience without sacrificing our values, and to come out on the other side of
the shame experience with more courage, compassion and connection than we
had going into it” (2012, 74). In Harm OCD terms, this means establishing
within yourself a willingness to be in the presence of shame as it arises in
response to your decision not to do compulsions, to be willing to experience the

shame as it is, and then to be a witness to the benefits of having done your
exposure.
Shame becomes toxic when you buy into it, when you convince yourself that
you are bad. So naturally we want to avoid shame, even in doing ERP. But when
you see shame for what it is—thoughts and feelings about being bad, objects of
attention—then it doesn’t have to be a barrier to effective ERP. Mindfulness,
then, becomes a way to see shame arising in the course of doing ERP and to
know that it is not proof of your inadequacy, but just a reaction to thoughts and
feelings. Mindfulness allows you to widen the space in which these thoughts and
feelings exist. When we imagine that we cannot tolerate a thought or feeling, we
imagine it as a large object in a small space about to burst. But when we widen
our perspective, we recognize that there is unlimited space and these objects of
our attention seem smaller and smaller. This doesn’t mean analyzing or
“thinking” about them, but simply letting ourselves experience them, as they are,
without judgment.
Mindfulness is not a thing that “works” or “doesn’t work.” To view mindfulness
as a trick for getting rid of thoughts and feelings is to miss the point. Being awake
doesn’t work or not work. It is simply a way of being. You may be tired (less
awake) or wired (very awake), but it remains a state of being, not an activity.
Mindfulness is not a hammer or a screwdriver. Mindfulness is an understanding
of how things are built.
Your Character Is Unique, 
But Not an Antique
If you’ve had Harm OCD for a long time, you’ve been carrying around your
moral character like it’s a very expensive antique. The thing about expensive
antiques is that they can only take a little wear and tear before their perceived
financial value plummets dramatically. One might assume that simply doing all
the right things just the right way (the way OCD says you have to) will keep this
precious antique in mint condition. But this is nonsense. Life is hard. Really
hard. Even the easy parts. So this thing you carry around is going to get dented
and scratched, and you need to love it anyway.

If you’ve had Harm OCD for a long time and have either never been treated or
have struggled to find an effective treatment, you may have come to some of the
following false conclusions:
I’m not better because I don’t really have Harm OCD, I’m just
damaged goods.
I had my chance to get better and now that ship has sailed.
I don’t deserve to get better.
I should have gotten better earlier.
I am too far gone with these thoughts to ever be free.
I failed when I started thinking these thoughts and all I’ve done is fail
since.
There’s no point to recognizing my good qualities when I am a bad
person.
These are just a few of the shame-based comments I’ve heard in my time
working with Harm OCD sufferers. The OCD has been telling you for so long
that you are going to hurt someone (including yourself), that you can’t imagine
being happy. Nor can you imagine that you are messed up like everyone else. No,
you believe you’re a special kind of messed up that no one wants to talk about.
This way of thinking is actually part of the disorder. Happiness is not something
one deserves or doesn’t deserve. It’s freely available to anyone who wishes to
reach out and grab it. But you have to be willing to start now. You don’t get to
rewrite the past. You don’t get to scrub the history of thinking horrible thoughts
and then start from scratch. You start now. This moment. And now again. This
moment. Take a moment to recognize that you are currently reading a book
about overcoming your Harm OCD. You are already inside the process of
overcoming your OCD challenges and you’re already further along than the first
step.
What Does It Really Look Like to Overcome Harm
OCD?

Overcoming any form of OCD may look different to different sufferers, but one
thing remains the same—intrusive thoughts are part of life. If you’re imagining
overcoming Harm OCD as something like never having another unwanted
violent thought or never experiencing any anxiety, then you’re still playing by the
OCD’s rules and still being an active participant in your own suffering. It’s
natural to have unwanted thoughts (yes, even repugnant violent ones) and it’s
natural to experience occasional anxiety (yes, even when nothing is actually
wrong). Mastering OCD means living with little or no impairment, but also
means being ready for the fight when OCD flares up. This may involve being in
therapy and/or taking medication indefinitely, sporadically, or not at all. Your
journey is your journey.
Below is a glimpse at what Harm OCD sufferers could look like when they
become Harm OCD masters. I’ve included just a few bullet points that indicate
their progress in freeing themselves from OCD. Consider what other indicators of
mastery might be found in the following characters that were introduced at the
beginning of the book.
Joanna
Joanna spent a lot of time ruminating over whether she was a bad person because
she often thought she might not have been vigilant enough in keeping others safe.
She even suspected that she might have violent intentions toward others and could
be some sort of sociopath who willingly allows people to get harmed. What are some
ways we would know if she got better?
• She stopped reading articles about serial killers to prove she wasn’t one and
started watching serial killer detective shows and letting herself just enjoy them.
When asked how she could tolerate the violence in the British detective show
Luther, all she could think to say was, “Idris Elba is ridiculously good looking.”
• She challenged herself daily to resist seeking certainty whenever she had the
thought that she might have let someone get harmed. She got in the habit of saying
to herself, “Not everyone gets to live” whenever she considered confessing to her
husband that she forgot to wash her hands after taking out the trash.
• She meditated daily and learned to observe her self-critical thoughts as part of the
larger stream of thoughts in her consciousness. She began to view treating herself

with disdain as a form of harming the people who love her. She began to view
questions about whether she “cared enough” about the safety of others as challenges
to care less.
Mandy
Mandy’s Harm OCD was triggered by news of a violent event. She worried that
her intrusive violent thoughts could lead to her snapping and harming someone.
This led to years and years of desperately trying to avoid anything that might trigger
the thoughts. What would be some indicators that she got better?
• She stopped avoiding people she cared about even when her OCD told her she
might hurt them, and instead took the opportunity to practice ERP and demand
more closeness with her loved ones.
• She started using knives in the kitchen and actually became a pretty good cook.
After washing the knives she used, she would just leave them out on a towel to dry.
• She practiced ERP, sometimes every day, sometimes whenever she needed it. On
days when her OCD seemed to be in high gear, she wrote scripts about snapping
and slept with a knife by her bed. For every three romantic comedies she made her
husband watch, she made sure to select one movie she thought might be triggering.
• She still continued to see her therapist, sometimes weekly, sometimes going
months between sessions. When she talked about her intrusive thoughts, she spoke
plainly about them like they were symptoms of a cold and she resisted urges to ask
her therapist for reassurance.
Elizabeth
Elizabeth had intrusive fears of committing suicide even though she did not feel
suicidal herself. Her OCD told her that she could jump from a ledge at any moment
and this led to avoidance and other compulsions. What are some ways we would
know that she’s developed some mastery over her OCD?
• She was able to get a room in a hotel without insisting it be on a lower floor, and
would even ask for the room with the best view of the city.
• She consistently responded to intrusive thoughts with humor and a shrug. She
stopped trying to convince herself she was safe because she had things she loved in

life and instead just loved the things in her life.
• Her triggering thoughts flared up from time to time, especially around stressful
events, but she reminded her husband not to reassure her during these times and not
to let her avoid the household cleaners or medicine cabinet.
• She practiced mindfulness and used ERP when thoughts got sticky. She knows all
the lyrics to Nevermind by Nirvana.
Richard
Richard’s Harm OCD told him he was going to shoot his infant child with a gun,
despite the fact that he hated guns and loved his son. He tried to prove he could
never do it by avoiding anything gun-related and he severely limited any alone time
with his son for fear that he would act out. What would indicate his recovery?
• He frequently went out of his way to spend time alone with his son and let the
thoughts do as they pleased.
• He went to a shooting range and took lessons in using a firerarm (even though he
still doesn’t own a gun, it’s just not his thing).
• He practiced ERP by going to sporting goods stores and watching movies with lots
of shootouts.
• He still writes the occasional script about losing it and assassinating the poor boy.
Sometimes he does this in his head with his son right there, but not to check for self-
reassurance.
Everyone with Harm OCD has the capacity to learn to be something greater
than his or her unwanted thoughts. One day you’ll look back on this phase of
your life, this living nightmare where you devoted so much attention to trying to
be certain you would never harm yourself or anyone else, and remember, “Wow,
that was a really hard time.” Yes, you’ll still get a kick in the gut now and again.
Stress, sleep deprivation, or just being alive on earth will occasionally cause the
OCD to rear its ugly head and take a swipe at you when it can. There will be
lapses and occasional relapses that may require some hard work to recover from.
See Everyday Mindfulness for OCD (Hershfield and Nicely 2017) for tips on
navigating these bumps in the road. But if you learn to use your ERP and

mindfulness skills as a consistent part of your lifestyle, you can free your attention
for the people and things you really care about.
Take the opportunity now to write out a short list of things that would indicate
that you’ve developed mastery over your Harm OCD. You may be just starting out
or well into the therapeutic process, but ask yourself, “What would it look like to
me?” How do you imagine your relationship with Harm OCD getting better?
Notice urges to say things like “I’ll stop having harm thoughts” and try to redirect
yourself to something more realistic and more meaningful. What role will
unwanted violent thoughts play in your life? What things do you care about that
you will enjoy again?
You’re Really Not Crazy
As we approach the finish line of this book, I encourage you to consider one not-
so-subtle way your Harm OCD may be holding you back. Harm OCD leads you
to believe that you are going to do something terrible, that you’ve done
something terrible, or that you yourself are something terrible. You may have
found, then, that when you strive to do something great, something that may get
you noticed by others, you suddenly become aware of the idea that your intrusive
thoughts could ruin it.
For example, what if you become president and then spontaneously harm
yourself or someone else like your OCD says? Or what if it’s discovered that you
somehow harmed someone in your past and now it is coming to light? Could
there be a hashtag with your name on it just waiting to reveal itself at the
moment you achieve your hopes and dreams? The OCD is going to make it seem
as if falling from a low place is more sensible than falling from a high place, but
this is a trap. The OCD is trying to get you to do the worst avoidance compulsion
of all, avoidance of leading a fulfilling life. The concern is that your fall from
grace will include some kind of public humiliation and that this will inevitably
cause tremendous harm to people around you. In other words, if your fears come
true when you’re president, not only will your character be assassinated, but your
loved ones, colleagues, and all the people who voted for you will suffer too.
So how can we do exposure to this one? As it turns out, pretty much all ERP
for all Harm OCD begins and ends with this: choosing to live your life. When

you start to let go of safety behaviors, such as by putting the kitchen knives back
where they belong, you also begin to cook again. When you get behind the wheel
of the car and let thoughts of turning into oncoming traffic come and go, you
also begin to visit friends again. When you spend time alone with your sweet,
innocent loved one and take the risk that some secret monster version of you will
lash out, you also begin to access affection again. But this is only the beginning.
Reclaiming what you’ve lost to your Harm OCD goes beyond a return to the
activities you once enjoyed and the people you once enjoyed sharing them with.
Truly standing up to Harm OCD is to go after a bigger life than the one you had
before.
You don’t have to aim to be the leader of the free world, but I recommend that
you aim higher than your self-doubt. Sure, anyone could aspire to maximize their
potential as a human being, but that’s not what I’m emphasizing here. What I’m
advocating is sticking it to the OCD by flaunting how much you are capable of
when you allow yourself to accept uncertainty about your intrusive thoughts.
Don’t just get by. Take your fear of harming to wherever harming would do the
most damage. Taunt the OCD by letting people know you, by starting a family, by
marketing yourself professionally, and so on. Take every opportunity you can to
tell the OCD, “If you’re going to ruin my life, you’re going to have a lot to ruin.
I’d like to see you try.”

Acknowledgments
I want to thank Jess O’Brien for remembering I wanted to write a book on Harm
OCD, and the rest of the team at New Harbinger for reining in my sick sense of
humor and tendency to drone on and sort of dance around the point and mix
metaphors and write run-on sentences like this one you are reading right now. I
also want to thank my patient wife for listening to me complain about deadlines
and my equally patient kids for tolerating my working on this on weekends.
Additional thanks to Jonathan Grayson for agreeing to write the Foreword even
after telling me multiple times that he doesn’t write forewords; to Eric Storch for
generously sharing some of his research when I started this book; and to Shala
Nicely for being on the receiving end of many desperate texts about the book not
meeting my OCD’s expectations.
References
Aardema, F., and K. O’Connor. 2007. “The Menace Within: Obsessions and the Self.” Journal of Cognitive
Psychotherapy 21: 182-197.
Abramowitz, J. S., M. E. Franklin, S. A. Schwartz, and J. M. Furr. 2003a. “Symptom Presentation and
Outcome of Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.” Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology 71: 1049-1057.
Abramowitz, J. S., S. A. Schwartz, K. M. Moore, and K. R. Luenzmann. 2003b. “Obsessive-Compulsive
Symptoms in Pregnancy and the Puerperium: A Review of the Literature.” Journal of Anxiety Disorders 17:
461-478.
Abramowitz, J. S., B. J. Deacon, B. O. Olatunji, M. G. Wheaton, N. C. Berman, D. Losardo, K. Timpano, P.
McGrath, B. Riemann, 
T. Adams, T. Björgvinsson, E. Storch, and L. R. Hale. 2010. “Assessment of Obsessive-Compulsive
Symptom Dimensions: Development and Evaluation of the Dimensional Obsessive-Compulsive Scale.”
Psychological Assessment 22: 180-198.
American Psychiatric Association [APA]. 2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth
Edition [DSM-V]. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Assocation.
Baer, L. 2001. Imp of the Mind. New York: Penguin.

Booth, B. D., S. H. Friedman, S. Curry, H. Ward, and S. Stewart. 2014. “Obsessions of Child Murder:
Underrecognized Manifestations of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.” Journal of the American Academy of
Psychiatry and the Law 42: 66-74.
Brown, B. 2012. Daring Greatly. New York: Avery.
Burns, D. D. 1989. The Feeling Good Handbook: Using the New Mood Therapy in Everyday Life. New York: W.
Morrow.
Ching, T. H. W., M. Williams, and J. Siev. 2017. “Violent Obsessions Are Associated with Suicidality in an
OCD Analog Sample of College Students.” Cognitive Behaviour Therapy 46: 129-140.
Craske, M. G., K. Kircanski, M. Zelikowski, J. Mystkowsi, N. Chowdhury, and A. Baker. 2008. “Optimizing
Inhibitory Learning During Exposure Therapy.” Behaviour Research and Therapy 46: 5-27.
Glazier, K., R. M. Calixte, R. Rothschild, and A. Pinto. 2013. “High Rates of OCD Symptom
Misidentification by Mental Health Professionals.” Annals of Clinical Psychiatry 25: 201-209.
Glazier, K., C. T. Wetterneck, S. Singh, and M. T. Williams. 2015. “Stigma and Shame as Barriers to
Treatment in Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders.” Journal of Depression and Anxiety 4: 191.
Golden, A., W. Haynes, M. VanDyke, and C. Pollard. 2016. “Treatment of Aggressive Obsessions in an
Adult with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.” In Storch E., Lewin A. (eds) Clinical Handbook of -
Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders, edited by Eric A. Storch and Adam B. Lewin. Switzerland:
Springer.
Goodman, W., L. H. Price, S. A. Rasmussen, C. Mazure, R. L. 
Fleischmann, C. L. Hill, and D. Charney. 1989. “The Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale Part I:
Development, Use and Reliability.” Archives of General Psychiatry 46: 1006-1011.
Grant, J. E., A. Pinto, M. Gunnip, M. C. Mancebo, J. L. Eisen, et al. 2006. “Sexual Obsessions and Clinical
Correlates in Adults with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry 47: 325-329.
Grayson, J. 2003. Freedom from Obsessive Compulsive Disorder. New York: Berkley Books.
Hershfield, J. 2015. When a Family Member Has OCD: Mindfulness and Cognitive Behavioral Skills to Help
Families Affected by Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications.
Hershfield, J., and T. Corboy. 2013. The Mindfulness Workbook for OCD: A Guide to Overcoming Obsessions
and Compulsions Using Mindfulness and Cognitive Behavioral Therapy. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger
Publications.
Hershfield, J., and S. Nicely. 2017. Everyday Mindfulness for OCD: Tips, Tricks, and Skills for Living Joyfully.
Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications.
Hirschtritt, M. E., M. H. Bloch, and C. A. Mathews. 2017. “Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: Advances in
Diagnosis and Treatment.” Journal of the American Medical Association 317: 1358-1367.
Jacoby, R. J., and J. S. Abramowitz. 2016. “Inhibitory Learning Approaches to Exposure Therapy: A Critical
Review and Translation to Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.” Clinical Psychology Review 49: 28-40.
Jacoby, R., R. Leonard, B. Riemann, and J. Abramowitz. 2016. “Self-Punishment as a Maladaptive Thought
Control Strategy Mediates the Relationship Between Beliefs About Thoughts and Repugnant
Obsessions.” Cognitive Therapy and Research 40: 179-187.
Johnco, C., and E. A. Storch. 2017. “Unacceptable Obsessional Thoughts in Children and Adolescents.” In
The Wiley Handbook of Obsessive Compulsive Disorders, edited by Jonathan S. Abramowitz, Dean McKay,
and Eric A. Storch. Chichester, UK: John Wiley and Sons.
Kellner, M. 2010. “Drug Treatment of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.” Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience 12:
187-197.
Lee, H. J., and S. M. Kwon. 2003. “Two Different Types of Obsessions: Autogenous Obsessions and Reactive
Obsessions. Behavior Research and Therapy 41: 11-29.

Lee, E. B., S. Bistricky, A. Milam, C. T. Wetterneck, and T. Björgvinsson. 2016. “Thought Control Strategies
and Symptom Dimensions in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: Associations With Treatment Outcome.”
Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy 30: 177-189.
Leonard, R., and B. Riemann. 2012. “The Co-occurrence of Obsessions and Compulsions in OCD.” Journal
of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders 1: 211-215.
Masi, G., S. Millepiedi, M. Mucci, N. Bertini, L. Milantoni, and 
F. Arcangeli. 2005. “A Naturalistic Study of Referred Children and Adolescents with Obsessive-
Compulsive Disorder.” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 44: 673-681.
Moulding, R., F. Aardema, and K. P. O’Connor. 2014. “Repugnant Obsessions: A Review of the
Phenomenology, Theoretical Models, and Treatment of Sexual and Aggressive Obsessional Themes in
OCD.” Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorder 3: 161-168.
Neff, K. 2011. Self-Compassion: Stop Beating Yourself Up and Leave Insecurity Behind. New York: William
Morrow.
Piacentini, J., R. L. Bergman, M. Keller, and J. McCracken. 2003. “Functional Impairment in hildren and
Adolescents with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 13:
S61-S69.
Pinker, S. 2011. The Better Angels of Our Nature. New York: Viking.
Purdon, C. 2004. “Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment of Repugnant Obsessions.” Journal of Clinical Psychology
60: 1169-1180.
Rachman, S., and P. de Silva. 1978. “Abnormal and Normal Obsessions.” Behaviour Research and Therapy 16:
233-248.
Rachman, S., and R. Shafran. 1999. “Cognitive Distortions: Thought–Action Fusion.” Clinical Psychology
and Psychotherapy 6: 80-85.
Rapoport, J. L., G. Inoff-Germain, M. M. Weissman, S. Greenwald, 
W. E. Narrow, P. S. Jensen, B. B. Lahey, and G. Canino. 2000. “Childhood Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder in the NIMH MECA Study: Parent Versus Child Identification of Cases.” Journal of Anxiety
Disorders 14: 535-548.
Rasmussen, S. A., and M. T. Tsuang. 1986. “Clinical Characteristics and Family History in DSM-III
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.” American Journal of Psychiatry 143: 317-322.
Rasmussen, S. A., and J. L. Eisen. 1992. The Epidemiology and Clinical Features of Obsessive Compulsive
Disorder. Psychiatric Clinics of North America 15: 743-758.
Riskind, J. H., C. R. Ayers, and E. Wright. 2007. “Simulated Interpersonal Provocation and Fears of a Loss
of Impulse Control as Determinants of Aggressive Mental Intrusions.” Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy
21: 285-294.
Ruscio, A. M., D. J. Stein, W. T. Chiu, and R. C. Kessler. 2010. “The Epidemiology of Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication.” Molecular Psychiatry 15: 53-63.
Scahill, L., M. A. Riddle, M. McSwiggin-Hardin, S. I. Ort, R. A. King, W. K. Goodman, D. Cicchetti, and J.
F. Leckmna. 1997. “Children’s Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale: Reliability and Validity.” Journal
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 36: 844-852.
Shafran, R., D. S. Thordardson, and S. Rachman. 1996. “Thought-Action Fusion in Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder.” Journal of Anxiety Disorders 10: 379-391.
Singh, R., C. T. Wetterneck, M. T. Williams, and L. E. Knott. 2016. “The Role of Shame and Symptom
Severity on Quality of Life in Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders.” Journal of Obsessive
Compulsive and Related Disorders 11: 49-55.
Storch, E. A., C. W. Lack, L. J. Merlo, G. R. Geffken, M. L. Jacob, T. K. Murphy, and W. K. Goodman. 2007.
“Clinical Features of Children and Adolescents with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder and Hoarding
Symptoms.” Comprehensive Psychiatry 48: 313-318.

Storch, E. A., L. J. Merlo, M. J. Larson, C. S. Bloss, G. R. Geffken, M. L. Jacob, and W. K. Goodman. 2008.
“Symptom Dimensions and Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy Outcome for Pediatric Obsessive-
Compulsive Disorder.” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 117: 67-75.
Storch, E. A., M. J. Larson, W. K. Goodman, S. A. Rasmussen, L. H. Price, and T. K. Murphy. 2010a.
“Development and Psychometric Evaluation of the Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale—Second
Edition.” Psychological Assessment 22: 223-232.
Storch, E. A., T. Björgvinsson, B. Riemann, A. B. Lewin, M. J. Morales, and T. K. Murphy. 2010b. “Factors
Associated with Poor Response in Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Pediatric Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder.” Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic 74: 167-185.
Valentiner, D. P., and S. A. Smith. 2008. “Believing That Intrusive Thoughts Can Be Immoral Moderates the
Relationship Between Obsessions and Compulsions for Shame-Prone Individuals.” Cognitive Therapy and
Research 32: 714-720.
Wegner, D. M. 1989. White Bears and Other Unwanted Thoughts: Suppression, Obsession, and the Psychology of
Mental Control. New York: Viking/Penguin.
Wetterneck, C.T., S. Singh, and J. Hart. 2014. “Shame Proneness in Symptom Dimensions of Obsessive-
Compulsive Disorder.” Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic 78: 177-190.
Williams, M. T., S. G. Farris, E. Turkheimer, A. Pinto, K. Ozanick, M. E. Franklin, M. Liebowitz, H. B.
Simpson, and E. B. Foa. 2011. “Myth of the Pure Obsessional Type in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.”
Depression and Anxiety 28: 495-500.
Winston, S. M., and M. N. Seif. 2017. Overcoming Unwanted Intrusive Thoughts. Oakland, CA: New
Harbinger Publications.
Wu, M. S., and E. A. Storch. 2016. “A Case Report of Harm-Related Obsessions in Pediatric Obsessive-
Compulsive Disorder.” Journal of Clinical Psychology 72: 1120-1128.
Jon Hershfield, MFT, is director of The OCD and Anxiety Center of Greater
Baltimore in Hunt Valley, MD. He specializes in the use of mindfulness and
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
and related disorders. He is author of When a Family Member Has OCD, and
coauthor of The Mindfulness Workbook for OCD and Everyday Mindfulness For
OCD.
Foreword writer Jonathan Grayson, PhD, is a licensed psychologist specializing
in OCD, director of the Grayson Center, and adjunct clinical assistant professor
of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at the University of Southern California,
where he lectures and supervises residents.

Publisher’s Note
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard
to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not
engaged in rendering psychological, financial, legal, or other professional services. If
expert assistance or counseling is needed, the services of a competent professional should
be sought.
This is a self-help book and not a clinical manual. It should not be used
for self-diagnosis and should not replace the advice of a mental health professional.
Distributed in Canada by Raincoast Books
Copyright © 2018 by Jon Hershfield
New Harbinger Publications, Inc.
5674 Shattuck Avenue
Oakland, CA 94609
www.newharbinger.com

The section “Unhelpful Ideas About Uncertainty Acceptance” is adapted from
the author’s blog post, “Four Mistaken Beliefs About OCD,” for
http://www.intrusivethoughts.org. Used by permission.
Cover design by Amy Shoup
Acquired by Jess O’Brien
Edited by Ken Knabb
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data on file
20 19 18
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 First Printing

Contents
Forewordvii
Introduction1
PART 1: Understanding Harm OCD
1 Defining Harm OCD11
2 Tools and Techniques33
PART 2: Using the Principles of H.E.A.L. for Different Manifestations of Harm
OCD
3 Fear of a Harmful Identity67
4 Fear of Harming Others85
5 Fear of Self-Harm101
6 Fear of Harming Children117
PART 3: The Bigger Picture
7 Harm OCD and Everyone Else135
8 Harm OCD and You149
Acknowledgments159
References161
Distress
