~ Addiction
Recovery Skills
Workbook

Changing Addictive Behaviors
Using CBT, Mindfulness, and
Motivational Interviewing Techniques


“A cutting-­edge, comprehensive, and interactive approach to the science of addiction recov­
ery, written with great respect and compassion for the reader. Anyone struggling with the 
demons of addiction will find real help here, and hope.”
—­Terri Cheney, author of the New York Times bestseller Manic
“The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook is an excellent translation of modern science into prac­
tical skills development. From explaining the basic brain changes associated with the devel­
opment of addiction to laying out a systematic path to behavioral change and recovery, 
Glasner-­Edwards has taken the very best of addiction science and turned it into common 
sense and step-­by-­step instructions. I think this workbook will be as important for families 
and friends of addicted individuals as for those affected directly. Either way, this is a power­
ful and practical tool to aid recovery.”
—­A. Thomas McLellan, founder and chairman of the board of the Treatment 
Research Institute, and former deputy director of the White House Office of 
National Drug Control Policy
“In creating The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook, Glasner-­Edwards has developed a resource 
that is at the cutting edge of recovery from addiction. In a respectful, direct, and clear way, 
she provides readers with key tools necessary to build the motivation to change, learn the 
skills needed to change, and apply those skills to achieving and maintaining change. Glasner-­
Edwards does a wonderful job of integrating the three most critical innovations in evidence-­
based approaches to treatment in the last fifty years: cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), 
motivational enhancement, and mindful observation. There has been excellent research in 
all three areas demonstrating their value in aiding individuals in achieving their goals to be 
clean and sober, and Glasner-­Edwards has created a resource that will be a wonderful tool 
for anyone addressing substance use problems. I anticipate this workbook will become a 
standard in the field.”
—­John R. McQuaid, PhD, professor of clinical psychology at the University of 
California, San Francisco; associate chief of mental health for clinical administration 
at the San Francisco VA Medical Center; and coauthor of Peaceful Mind
“As one of America’s most knowledgeable addiction scientists, Suzette Glasner-­Edwards 
writes with clarity and authority about the state of the art of treatment for addiction, a dev­
astating disease that affects millions of people and families. Glasner-­Edwards explains the 
complex science of addiction in terms that everyone can understand. Most important, she 
provides guidance to help the afflicted overcome this illness. This book will help end the 
stigma of addiction and it will save lives.”
—­David Sheff, journalist and New York Times best-­selling author of Clean 
and the memoir Beautiful Boy

“In this self-­care book, Glasner-­Edwards provides a much-­needed addition to the substance 
abuse treatment field by providing a hopeful and highly accessible workbook for people 
struggling with substance abuse and addiction. This book explains the mystery of addiction 
and how to communicate with addiction treatment providers. It offers a range of interactive 
evidence-­based therapy tools and techniques to achieve self-­directed behavioral change. It 
integrates several important approaches, including cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), 
mindfulness, and motivational interviewing, giving individuals powerful tools to tackle this 
devastating illness.”
—­Karen Miotto, MD, clinical professor in the department of psychiatry and 
biobehavioral sciences at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), and 
director of the UCLA Addiction Medicine Clinic
“I have worked in clinical addictions research for over fifteen years, and I can honestly say 
that this is no ordinary self-­help workbook. Glasner-­Edwards has expertly integrated the 
powerful combination of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), motivational enhancement, 
and mindfulness into an easily digestible treatment package that speaks directly to the 
person with an addictive disorder. It does more than just present a how-­to guide to the 
implementation of these key, cutting-­edge treatment strategies, however. This workbook also 
contains clear advice as to how, when, and where to ask for help; provides a framework for 
what is to be expected in the recovery process; and contextualizes the treatment strategies 
with other traditional addictions programs (12-­step, medication, etc.). These particular 
inclusions mean that the workbook cuts across traditional, well-­known barriers people report 
when considering addictions treatment, such as the stigma and mystery about what might 
happen, and problems with inconsistent, incoherent care. By integrating solutions that run 
across a range of lifestyle factors (e.g., exercise, social network enhancement, communica­
tion) and common comorbidities (e.g., depression, anxiety), this workbook also stands to be 
personally relevant to anybody concerned about their substance use, at any stage of severity. 
By hitting all of these targets sensitively, respectfully, and comprehensively in this work­
book, Glasner-­Edwards has provided a real service to the addictions community. I am going 
to recommend this to all of my clinical colleagues!”
—­Frances Kay-­Lambkin, associate professor at the National Drug and Alcohol 
Research Centre at the University of New South Wales, Australia

Ne w  Ha r b in ger Pu blicatio ns, Inc.
S uzet t e GlaSN e r- e dwa rd S, P h d
Changing Addictive Behaviors  
Using CBT, Mindfulness, and  
Motivational Interviewing Techniques
Addiction  
Recovery Skills 
Workbook
tH e

Publisher’s Note
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the 
understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering psychological, financial, legal, or other professional services. If expert assis­
tance or counseling is needed, the services of a competent professional should be sought. 
Distributed in Canada by Raincoast Books
Copyright © 2015 by Suzette Glasner-Edwards
New Harbinger Publications, Inc.
5674 Shattuck Avenue
Oakland, CA 94609
www.newharbinger.com
Exercise 7.4, “SOBER Breathing,” reprinted from MINDFULNESS-BASED RELAPSE PREVENTION FOR ADDICTIVE 
BEHAVIORS by Sarah Bowen, Neha Chawla, and G. Alan Marlatt, copyright © 2010 by The Guilford Press. Reprinted with 
permission of The Guilford Press.
Cover design by Sara Christian
Acquired by Tesilya Hanauer
Edited by Susan LaCroix
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Glasner-Edwards, Suzette, author.
  The addiction recovery skills workbook : changing addictive behaviors using CBT, mindfulness, and motivational interviewing 
techniques / Suzette Glasner-Edwards ; foreword by Richard A Rawson.
       pages cm
  Includes bibliographical references.
  ISBN 978-1-62625-278-3 (paperback) -- ISBN 978-1-62625-279-0 (pdf e-book) -- ISBN 978-1-62625-280-6 (epub)  1.  Substance 
abuse--Treatment. 2.  Addicts--Rehabilitation. 3.  Psychotherapy. 4.  Meditation--Therapeutic use.  I. Title. 
  RC564.G45 2015
  362.29--dc23
                                                            2015030657
Printed in the United States of America
17    16    15
10    9    8    7    6    5    4    3    2    1                                                                                           First printing

This book is dedicated to Lilly and Lila Edwards, for inspiring me to do all that I 
can to help people change; when we help one person heal, we slowly heal the world.


Contents
	
Foreword
vii
	
Introduction
1
Part 1: Understanding Addictive Behaviors
  1	
How Addiction Happens
9
  2	
Addiction Is a Brain Disease
25
Part 2: Overcoming Addictive Behaviors
  3	
Step 1: Strengthen Your Motivation and Commit to Change
41
  4	
Step 2: Set Yourself Up to Succeed
57
  5	
Step 3: Become a “Self Expert”
83
  6	
Step 4: Respond to Cognitive Distortions
109
  7	
Step 5: Become Mindful
131
  8	
Step 6: Rediscover Rewards
151
  9	
Step 7: Conquer Challenging Emotions
173
10	
Your Personalized Recovery Plan
197
	
Acknowledgments
209
	
Resources
211
	
References
213


Foreword
I 
remember in the 1980s being told by a seasoned counselor that “clients” should 
not be educated about addiction, because it would allow them to feel like they 
could understand and “control” their drug use and this would interfere with 
their surrendering to their disease. For many years, addicted individuals in treatment 
programs were repeatedly told that they should shut up and just do what they were 
told. More recently, we hear celebrity endorsements for luxury treatment programs 
and quasi-­religions which suggest that if you simply pay lots of money to these orga­
nizations and follow their science fiction or their narcissistically-­inspired formulas, it 
is very possible to become “cured” and avoid the hard work of recovery. This is an 
attractive and seductive message, but an inaccurate one—­it creates false hopes, but 
great profit margins. Both of these messages have been detrimental to the recovery 
efforts of many people.
In the development of effective, evidence-­based treatments for people with health 
problems, including substance use disorders, a few fundamental principles have 
emerged. First, it is important to educate individuals with scientifically accurate 
information about their illnesses and about the steps they can take to improve their 
health. Second, it is important to empower these individuals to take action and 
become active participants in improving and maintaining their own health. Third, it 
is critical that information is conveyed to these individuals in a respectful way, not by 
talking down to them or being preachy or judgmental. Finally, to get people to use 
treatment materials, those materials need to be relatable, interesting, and realistic. All 
of these principles are important in giving people the tools they need to improve their 
health and make positive changes in their lives.
The Addiction Recovery Workbook reflects a sophisticated knowledge of how to effec­
tively communicate to people struggling with substance use disorders. The workbook 
has been developed with a keen awareness of the scientific literature on the nature of 
addiction and the information and skills that are useful in helping people to stop 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
viii
using alcohol or drugs and develop a positive and sustainable recovery. The material 
in the workbook is presented in a way that shows a true understanding of how con­
fusing, frightening, and discouraging addiction can be to individuals struggling with 
excessive alcohol or drug use. The book communicates its message in a respectful 
way, giving the readers credit for investing time and effort, for taking responsibility 
for their own lives, and for seriously wanting to make changes, while at the same time 
avoiding a condescending or paternalistic tone. In short, this book approaches readers 
as adults who are responsible for their own lives—­who recognize they want to improve 
their lives, but are not sure exactly what to do or how to do it.
The reader is invited to join in the process of recovery, but, at the same time, it is 
clearly acknowledged that there may be ambivalence about taking on this job of 
recovery. Is this whole recovery thing really necessary? Do I really have a problem with drugs or 
alcohol? Why does my intention to occasionally use slide into compulsive, sometimes catastrophic, 
out-of-control, excessive use? Am I crazy? Do I have self-­destructive tendencies? Am I a bad 
person? I just want to be able to drink alcohol or use like a normal person—­why does this go 
“sideways” when I try? How can I tell if I am addicted? What does it mean to be addicted?
The first section of the workbook addresses many of the confusing and apparently 
paradoxical elements of addiction and how good, intelligent people can be drawn into 
a pattern of alcohol and drug use that can wreak havoc with their lives, resulting in 
damage to themselves and the people they love. This section contains current, accu­
rate information about what addiction is, why some people get addicted and others 
don’t, how to know if you do have a serious alcohol or drug problem, and what steps 
can be taken to begin to address this problem. The clear message is that there are 
many pathways and approaches to addressing problem alcohol and drug use. The 
workbook helps the reader understand that many people may need treatment with 
professional therapy, addiction medications, and 12-­step support, and that the book 
can be used together with these other recovery tools and approaches.
All of this information is given with a recognition that the reader is in a state of 
ambivalence, which is natural and normal. Rarely do people dive into a program of 
recovery with a burning desire and deep commitment to changing their lives and 
giving up a set of behaviors that, at one point in their lives, was a great source of 
pleasure (and, at times, still is). As addiction is explained, many case examples and 
conversations are used to illustrate the salient points and to show readers that the 
workbook was written for people like themselves.
The heart of the workbook is a set of chapters that address the major aspects of 
the recovery process. Each chapter gives an overview of its main theme, using clear 
explanations of the scientific principles and processes involved, as well as lots of 

Foreword
ix
examples of how the issues it presents may relate to the reader’s current situation. 
And each chapter has a wonderful collection of worksheets and written exercises to 
give readers a vehicle for expressing their own version of these issues and helping to 
personalize the concepts. These chapters cover an amazing array of the most current 
set of knowledge, principles, and skills that are considered either evidence based or 
extremely promising and under active study.
Included in these chapters are concepts of self-­directed behavior change; all kinds 
of tools to help people modify thoughts and beliefs; ways to build rewards and posi­
tive new behaviors into a life in recovery; strategies for managing negative mood 
states and coping with cravings for alcohol or drugs; relapse prevention approaches 
and skills; and a format for creating a clear, simple, and practical recovery plan. The 
approaches and strategies in these chapters come from well-­established clinical 
research literature. Included are concepts and skills from motivational interviewing, 
cognitive behavioral therapy, community reinforcement therapy, relapse prevention, 
contingency management, and the matrix model. In addition, other approaches are 
included that are currently considered to hold great promise in the addiction field but 
with more limited evidence. These include behavioral activation therapy, mindful­
ness meditation, dialectic behavioral therapy, and physical exercise.
Throughout the workbook, the principles and skills are illustrated with excellent 
case examples and scripts of conversations that help bring the information to life and 
make it useful. It is a very challenging task to communicate about the scientific litera­
ture on addiction and addiction treatment in a way that is accurate, understandable, 
and engaging. These case examples are written in such a way that they illustrate chal­
lenges, concepts, and solutions in a very readable style. What could otherwise be a 
litany of dry, clinical research is transformed into a collection of very relevant and 
applicable skills that readers can use and apply to their own situations. The sample 
conversation scripts help pull the readers into situations and allow them to vicari­
ously get a sense of how it feels to manage these commonly experienced recovery 
scenarios.
The Addiction Recovery Workbook is an important new resource for individuals strug­
gling with alcohol and drug use problems. It is an active document, not a textbook to 
be put on a shelf. The book has been written to enrich and empower the reader. For 
people who struggle with repeated failures to self-­manage their alcohol and drug use, 
it is a refreshingly positive and hope-­inducing resource. The overarching message is 
that there has been a great deal of knowledge amassed about the problem of addic­
tion and there are many ways to make progress in achieving recovery. There is no one 
school of thought that has all the answers, and there is no “right way” to recovery.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
x
The author clearly has great affection for the individuals she has worked with in 
her clinical practice and her research, who struggle with addiction. Her commitment 
to, and personal interest in, their well-­being is conveyed on every page. The Addiction 
Recovery Workbook is her way of giving a gift of hope and assistance to others who 
struggle with alcohol and drug problems.
—­Richard A. Rawson, Ph.D.
Professor and Co-­Director
UCLA Integrated Substance Abuse Programs
Semel Institute of Neuroscience and Behavior
David Geffen School of Medicine
University of California, Los Angeles

Introduction
I
magine that you are driving a car. Normally, your brain tells you when to go and 
when to stop. If you see a green light quickly change to yellow as you approach 
an intersection, your brain tells you, Hurry up, hit the brakes! There’s danger here! 
and almost instantly, without thinking, your foot is thrusting downward. The light 
turns red. You wait. The light turns green again. Your brain says, Okay, go! It’s safe now.
There’s a reason that your addiction is controlling you and your life, and not vice 
versa. You may know when to go and when to stop when you’re driving a car, but 
research has shown very clearly that when you become addicted to alcohol or drugs, 
the part of the brain that tells you when to stop drinking or using drugs becomes 
impaired. It malfunctions—­chronically. Terrible things can happen in your life as the 
result of your alcohol or drug use, but your brain becomes stuck in go mode. The 
brakes just stop working.
There are a range of circumstances that bring people into treatment for their 
addictions or to seek out a source of self-­help, like this book. Maybe you’ve gotten 
into legal trouble; perhaps you’ve been arrested for driving under the influence. Yet 
even in the face of these hardships, your addicted brain says, Go. Drinking will make you 
feel better. Perhaps your alcohol or drug use has created conflict in one or more of your 
important relationships, whether with parents, a partner, your children, or others 
with whom you are close. Despite the hurt that your addiction has caused you and 
your family, your addicted brain says, Go. Take a few pills; it will take the edge off. They 
just don’t get it. You can control it if you really want to.
Maybe your school or work performance has suffered, or you’ve even lost your job 
or dropped out of school or classes because of your alcohol or drug use. Your addicted 
brain says, Go. You need to use to cope. If you don’t use, you’ll fall apart. Another trigger 
point for seeking help is when your use of alcohol or drugs creates or worsens another 
condition. Maybe it used to make you feel better when you were depressed. But now 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
2
drinking or using takes you to darker places than you ever could have imagined 
before this whole vicious cycle started. Your addicted brain says, Go. Have a drink. You 
need it.
There is a lot to learn about the addicted brain, and you will be an expert on your 
own addiction once you’ve read this book. But first, take a moment to congratulate 
yourself for overpowering the go response. If you’re reading this book, that means 
that something inside of you is telling you to fight your addicted neurobiology. You 
had the intention to put on the brakes and find a way to reengage your brain’s ability 
to say stop, and you acted on it. That intention usually comes from the recognition 
that the pain and suffering that your addiction has caused you and your loved ones 
now outweighs the good things that drinking or using once did for you.
As strong as that intention and recognition might be at this moment, the urge to 
return to drinking or using can be equally, if not more, powerful. You already know 
this, because you have tried to control your use before, but failed. Perhaps you have 
even quit before, but somewhere along the way, the urge to drink or use took you over 
and flipped the go switch back into place. It’s that constant battle between the addicted 
part of the brain and the rational part of the brain that leaves those who suffer from 
addiction vulnerable to repeated episodes of destructive alcohol and drug use. These 
relapse episodes, while well understood as part of the illness, are often interpreted as 
a sign that recovery is not really possible to achieve. Some addicts reject the experi­
ence of an urge itself, feeling that urges are a sign that something is wrong or that 
they are not recovering.
Contrary to these ideas, scientific studies on the psychology of addiction have 
established that urges to drink or use drugs can persist well into recovery, and are not 
a sign of failure. As you learn more about the science behind addiction in this book, 
and as you practice three of the most effective therapeutic techniques for promoting 
recovery, you will develop an understanding of what an urge is and why it’s happen­
ing to you, and you will be better equipped to cope with it without drinking or using.
Research shows that urges will become less frequent and intense with time. But 
even if they don’t go away completely, with the right skills under your belt, you can 
manage them effectively over the long term. While you would ideally quit using 
drugs and alcohol after a single try and never turn back, you have probably learned 
through your own experience that managing urges to drink or use is not something 
that you can learn overnight. That is why you need a range of skills and tools to 
enable you to preserve your recovery anytime a situation, person, stressor, or state of 
mind places your recovery in jeopardy.

Introduction
3
Who This Book Can Help
This book was written for anyone who suffers from alcohol or drug addiction. Addiction 
is an illness that involves progressively losing control over your use. When you lose 
control of alcohol or drug use, devastating things begin to happen as a result, but you 
find yourself continuing to drink or use drugs anyway. Whether or not you have been 
formally diagnosed with an addiction, if you feel that you have lost control over your 
drug or alcohol use and you want to do something about it, this book can be helpful 
to you. Specifically, the techniques you will learn from this book can help you to 
strengthen your motivation to change your alcohol or drug use, and equip you with 
the knowledge about addiction and a variety of coping skills that will enable you to 
do so successfully. You will also learn about different types of treatment that are 
effective for your addiction, so that if you decided to pursue formal treatment, you 
will know what to look for and expect. This workbook focuses on alcohol and drug 
addiction, which is in the category of substance addiction. Other behavioral addic­
tions, or compulsive behaviors that may require treatment (such as gambling), are not 
addressed in this book.
If you are already working with a therapist or treatment provider for your addic­
tion, the exercises in this workbook can be a part of your therapy. Taking an active 
role in your treatment by bringing in concepts you are learning through self-­help can 
be useful in many ways. First, it can help you focus your treatment on learning the 
therapy skills that you find to be the most useful or that you need to work on the 
most. Second, you can build confidence in your ability to master the techniques, 
since you will be practicing them in these workbook exercises in between your therapy 
sessions. Third, since we’ll devote a lot of time to working on motivation, and scien­
tific studies have found that motivation predicts treatment success, you can improve 
your own prognosis by engaging in exercises to strengthen your motivation.
This workbook is not in any way intended to be a replacement for formal psycho­
logical or psychiatric treatment for addiction or any related health condition, but it 
can certainly be a tool for you to use while you are receiving treatment. Likewise, 
health care providers who work with patients who suffer from addiction may find 
this workbook helpful in suggesting exercises to increase motivation for change. It 
can also be an effective way to introduce cognitive behavioral relapse prevention 
skills, as well as mindfulness exercises for coping with uncomfortable emotions and 
cravings for alcohol and drugs.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
4
Putting the Techniques into Practice
Thanks to the great scientific advances that have been made in addiction treatment 
over the past decade, there is now a broader range of skills and treatment approaches 
that can help you overcome your struggle with drug or alcohol addiction. Unlike 
other addiction workbooks, which typically focus on a a single therapy approach 
(such as cognitive behavioral therapy), this book features a range of research-­based 
techniques drawing on three distinct yet compatible behavioral therapies to enable 
you to begin and sustain your recovery: (1) motivational therapy techniques, (2) cog­
nitive behavioral therapy, and (3) mindfulness techniques.
Motivational therapy techniques will help you get on the road to recovery, commit 
to making changes to your drug or alcohol use, and, whenever you need to, revisit and 
strengthen your motivation when it naturally shifts. The recovery process, like the 
rest of life, has its ups and downs. Thus, it is entirely normal to have days when you 
see perfectly clearly why abstaining from alcohol and drug use is essential to living 
the life that you want, alternating with days when you question why you’re going to 
all of this trouble to live a life of recovery. Grappling with your ambivalence is a good 
way to strengthen your motivation, especially when you have the therapeutic tools to 
consider both sides of it in an intentional and systematic way. These are the tools that 
you will learn about in chapter 3.
Cognitive behavioral therapy will help you understand how your thoughts (or 
cognitions) can trigger addictive behaviors, and how to recognize and change the 
“addictive thinking” that makes you vulnerable to relapse. And finally, mindfulness 
techniques will help you to curb your impulses to drink or use when you are experi­
encing the discomfort of a craving or another emotion that you naturally want to “get 
rid of.”
To help you practice and get comfortable using the techniques, in part 2 of this 
workbook you will complete exercises that are easy, meaningful, and applicable to 
your daily life. If you use this book to help you through the daily challenges you 
encounter in your recovery, your experiences with the exercises will guide you to 
discover which strategies help you the most. This way, by the time you finish the 
book, you will have developed your own unique set of “go-­to” skills. Not only will 
these skills help you to steer clear of alcohol and drugs, but you can use them to help 
you achieve life goals, strengthen your relationships, and live a healthier, happier 
life.

Introduction
5
The Power of 12-­Step Programs
You may be wondering how the techniques you will be learning in this book may or 
may not be compatible with 12-­step programs. The short answer is that they are com­
pletely compatible with the 12-­step model and, in fact, attending Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) or other self-­help groups may even help you to exercise some of the 
skills you will learn (such as reaching out for social support when you’re feeling 
tempted to drink or use drugs). Studies have shown that people who attend 12-­step 
groups and “work a program” by getting involved, finding a sponsor, working the 
steps, and giving back—­by speaking, making commitments to help out at meetings, 
sponsoring others, or in other ways—­tend to do well in their recovery in the longer 
term (Morgenstern et al. 1997). That said, 12-­step meetings are not the best fit for 
everyone, and there are many people who recover successfully without being involved 
in self-­help meetings at all. In short, you can effectively acquire the skills in this book 
without attending meetings, but if you are involved in a 12-­step program, you will 
find that what you learn in this book is compatible with the 12-­step principles.
How to Use This Workbook
By now you probably have a good sense of some of the things you are going to learn 
about as you read on. These are the main goals of working your way through the 
chapters and exercises in this book:
•	 To understand how addiction has affected you psychologically and biologi­
cally, and what steps you need to take to enable your mind and body to 
heal
•	 To abstain from using alcohol or drugs
•	 To learn strategies that enable you to “check in” with yourself regularly 
about your motivation to change your addictive behaviors, and strengthen 
your motivation when needed
•	 To learn healthy cognitive and behavioral coping skills
•	 To develop a mindfulness practice in your daily life, as a way of both coping 
with your emotions and preventing you from giving in to urges to drink or 
use drugs

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
6
•	 To develop knowledge about the types of treatment (both psychological 
and medical) that are available to you
That may look like a long list of goals, but they are all interrelated, and you can 
achieve every one of them. It has happened for a lot of people—­some of whom you 
will learn about when their stories are presented in this book—­who have gone from 
feeling like their addiction was controlling and ruining their lives to achieving absti­
nence from alcohol and drugs and taking the control back. Regaining that control 
opens up a whole new world of possibilities, and many recovering addicts use this 
control as the core building block of a happy, meaningful life. This is not to say that 
it will be easy. Although each person’s struggles are unique, all addicts struggle at 
various points in their recovery.
This struggle is part of the hand you’ve been dealt in your life as someone vulner­
able to the disease of addiction. To overcome it successfully, you will undoubtedly 
experience discomfort, frustration, vulnerability, tension, and—­at times—­even hope­
lessness. The key is to keep at it and never give up. Remember, it is not uncommon 
for an addict to go through treatment multiple times before achieving success. 
Likewise, many addicts relapse multiple times before they kick the habit for good.
If you work your way through this book, chapter by chapter; take the exercises 
seriously (that means practice them as many times as you need to in order to feel 
comfortable with each new technique); and make the commitment to work hard at it, 
you will get the most you possibly can out of it. While it is suggested that you com­
plete the chapters in part 2 in order, you should not hesitate to come back to chapter 
3 any time you feel that you need to revisit your motivation for recovery.
The therapeutic skills that you will learn in part 2 of this workbook can be used 
alone or in combination. These techniques are designed to arm you with a range of 
effective tools for managing your addiction, but you will not necessarily find each of 
them to be equally helpful. That is okay! There is no “one-­size-­fits-­all” approach to 
treating addiction. You will get the most you can out of this workbook by trying 
each step in order and evaluating which steps are the most helpful to you. If you 
have a therapist who can talk with you about each of the skills as you progress 
through the workbook, your therapist can help you to explore each concept as it 
relates to your personal, unique set of addictive behavior patterns. However, it isn’t 
necessary—­this workbook can be helpful to you regardless of whether you are in 
treatment. So let’s get on the road to your recovery and begin this healthy new 
chapter of your life!

PART 1
Understanding 
Addictive Behaviors


CHAPTER 1
How Addiction 
Happens
T
hink back to the first time you realized that your control over your use of 
alcohol or drugs was slipping away from you. Maybe someone said something 
about it and you felt defensive (though you probably know by now, you felt 
defensive because it was true!). Perhaps you recognized it yourself and tried harder to 
moderate your use, but you kept on coming to the same conclusion: one drink, one 
hit, one pill was no longer enough. One always led to more, and more led you to prob­
lems in your life. Yet even the problems weren’t enough to give you the strength to 
stop. The urge to continue, even if it made no sense, was too strong. This is what it is 
to have an addiction. You lose control over your use of drugs or alcohol, wreaking 
havoc on your life, and you find yourself continuing to drink or use anyway.
In this chapter, we’ll go into greater depth about the signs and symptoms of 
addiction, and you will learn about some of the things that might have made you 
vulnerable to addiction. After completing the exercises that help you identify your 
personal addiction risk factors and symptoms, should you decide that you need a 
professional to evaluate you, this chapter provides guidance to help you identify a 
qualified professional who can help.
How Is Addiction Diagnosed?
Though you can easily look in a textbook or on the Internet to find the criteria that 
are used to determine whether someone has an addiction, you can probably define it 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
10
just as well by reflecting on your own experience. What led you to believe that you 
were in need of help to manage your use of alcohol or drugs, and what were the con­
sequences of your use in your life? As you are learning, addiction usually has to do 
with a loss of control over drinking or using drugs. Let’s think about how that might 
unfold. Consider what it was like when you started drinking or using. If you are like 
most people, you started drinking for one of three reasons:
•	 Alcohol or drugs made you feel really good.
•	 They helped you to feel better when you were not feeling well (for example, 
when you were in physical pain or discomfort, or when you were experienc­
ing negative emotions such as sadness, anxiety, or anger).
•	 They enhanced your performance at something (for example, sports or the 
ability to work long hours without getting tired).
If you were seeking the good, pleasurable feelings, or the performance enhance­
ment, then your motivation was for what is known as positive reinforcement. If you were 
trying to alleviate physical or emotional pain, then you were “self-­medicating” with 
alcohol or drugs. (This is also called negative reinforcement because you are drinking or 
using to “take away” something unpleasant, like pain.)
Regardless of the reason you were drawn to alcohol or drugs, in the beginning, it 
worked. You came to expect certain physical and emotional sensations when you 
were drinking or using, and just like we come to expect pleasure from a tasty dessert 
when we eat it (and the pleasure always comes!), you knew that you could count on 
feeling the sensations you were expecting each time you drank alcohol or used drugs. 
And this is what kept the pattern going: the more these expectations of elation, relax­
ation, happiness, confidence, relief, or any other sensation you were seeking were 
fulfilled, the more you wanted to drink or use drugs.
At some point, a transition occurred. The usual sequence of drink or use, and feel 
good or better did not work in the same way that it did initially. Maybe you developed 
tolerance. This happens when the amount of alcohol or drug that first gave you the 
feeling you were seeking no longer works in the same way; you begin to need more. 
Maybe you started to experience withdrawal symptoms, which are the unpleasant effects 
of alcohol or drugs leaving your body. These symptoms can lead you to want to drink 
or use more so that you will feel better. Though these effects are different depending 
on which drug you use, they usually involve a combination of unpleasant physical 
sensations (such as nausea or vomiting, headaches, shaking, and sweating) and 
­emotions (such as depression and anxiety). When the symptoms of tolerance or 

How Addiction Happens
11
withdrawal begin, this often marks the progression of what started as social or recre­
ational alcohol or drug use to problematic use. As this transition occurs, you start to 
feel that you need to drink or use just to feel normal.
So, how do you know when you’re addicted? It’s when that need—­to drink or use 
to feel normal—­starts to override most of the other things you value in life. During 
that process, people and things that are important in your life become affected by 
what has now turned into compulsive drug or alcohol use. This happens because, when 
you are so preoccupied with drinking or using to feel “okay,” other things you used 
to do with the time that you spend using, recovering from using, and planning to use 
again start to fall by the wayside. What’s more, despite its negative impact on one or 
more aspects of your life (such as your ability to be productive, your physical and 
emotional well-­being, and your important relationships), you find yourself continuing 
to drink or use anyway. In the 12-­step philosophy this is often referred to as the 
“insanity” of addiction; you keep on doing the same thing over and over again (drink­
ing or using), yet you are expecting different results. You think, It’s not going to get out 
of hand this time! when, in reality, your days of drinking or using in moderation are far 
behind you.
Let’s take a look at how this pattern developed in Charlie’s life.
Charlie’s Story
Charlie is a twenty-­three-­year-­old man who is attending a local university as a 
Computer Science major. He experimented with drugs and alcohol throughout his 
teens, with phases of smoking pot daily alternating with phases of heavy drinking. 
But pot and alcohol were easy for him to give up and he never considered himself to 
be a person with “addictive tendencies.”
When he was in his second year of college, a friend of his offered to share some 
pills he was taking to enhance his ability to pay attention and stay up for long 
hours during final exams. The pills, called Adderall, were prescribed to his friend 
for attention deficit disorder, but his friend took a little more than he was 
prescribed and found that it helped him when he needed to cram for exams or big 
assignments. Charlie thought, Why not? and after trying the Adderall a few times, 
he found that it really enhanced his performance in school during finals. So he 
started asking around and found someone to supply him, just in case he wanted to 
get it in a crunch.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
12
After a few months of using Adderall on and off, Charlie found himself using the 
pills not only for finals or major assignments, but habitually for studying or 
homework. Adderall became somewhat of a crutch for focusing his attention. Despite 
the benefits, Charlie, who was normally a very upbeat and sociable person, found 
himself feeling irritable, preferring to be alone much of the time. When he wanted to 
sleep after studying for long hours on Adderall, he just couldn’t bring his energy level 
down and he found himself struggling with terrible insomnia. Though he tried to 
cut back on the Adderall several times, each time he found that his concentration 
was poor, and he felt stressed about the impact this could have on his grades.
In an attempt to resolve his insomnia problem, Charlie acquired a prescription 
for some sleeping pills, but they didn’t work. He found himself doubling and 
sometimes tripling the dose to get to sleep. After only a few weeks of alternating 
between the sleeping pills and the Adderall, Charlie felt overtired and unable to 
think clearly. As a consequence, he was less productive at school. Charlie was 
becoming more and more isolated from his friends, and his grades started to slip. 
His life suddenly seemed to be dominated by pills: thinking about them, coming 
down from them, feeling the urge to take them, and planning how he was going to 
manage the balance between the uppers (Adderall) and the downers (sleeping pills) 
so that he could get everything done. Though he was trying his best to keep it all 
together, his life was slowly coming apart.
Though Charlie was working a part-­time job at the campus bookstore, the cost 
of taking Adderall regularly began to add up and he started running out of money. 
As his supply of Adderall ran out, he felt depressed, irritable, unmotivated, and 
unable to concentrate. His parents came to visit him at school just prior to spring 
break, and without a thought, he took his mother’s checkbook out of her purse and 
wrote himself several checks of a few hundred dollars each to cash. Maybe, he 
thought, if the amounts were not so large and he cashed them gradually, she 
wouldn’t notice.
Like Charlie, you have probably found yourself acting in ways that are completely 
out of character for you when drugs or alcohol have taken hold of you and your life. 
What started out as using to feel good or to alleviate some negative feelings (or if 
you’re like Charlie, to enhance your performance in some way) somehow got very out 
of hand. Much of this has to do with the effects of substances on the brain, which are 
explained in the next chapter. But first, let’s spend a few minutes looking over the 
signs and symptoms of addiction.

How Addiction Happens
13
Exercise 1.1: Addiction Signs and Symptoms
Below is a list of signs and symptoms of addiction. Place a check next to those that you have 
experienced in the past twelve months.
Tolerance
      	
You need to use more alcohol or drugs to feel the desired effect.
      	
The same amount of alcohol or drugs doesn’t do what it used to.
Withdrawal
      	
When you don’t have alcohol or drugs, you are uncomfortable physically or 
emotionally.
      	
You’ve used alcohol or another substance to help make yourself feel better 
when you were coming down from alcohol or drugs.
Craving
      	
You think about drugs or alcohol frequently.
      	
Until you’ve acted on an urge by drinking or using, it is very hard to get it out 
of your head.
Loss of Control
      	
You’ve made rules for yourself concerning how much you will drink or use but 
you were unable to stick to them.
      	
You’ve tried to quit or cut back your use of alcohol or drugs but were not able 
to.
      	
You’ve found yourself drinking or using more than you had planned to or for 
a longer period of time than you meant to.
      	
You’ve felt at times that you couldn’t fit in or feel good without alcohol or 
drugs.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
14
      	
You have used alcohol or drugs when you were feeling upset or angry with 
someone.
      	
You have blacked out (or had periods of time for which you have no memory) 
when under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
      	
You have overdosed on drugs.
      	
You have used one or more drugs without knowing what it was or how it would 
affect you.
      	
The thought of running out of drugs or alcohol makes you anxious.
Legal Problems
      	
You have been arrested or had other legal problems as a result of drinking or 
using.
      	
You have stolen things to pay for alcohol or drugs.
Problems in Social or Occupational Functioning
      	
You have made mistakes at work or school because of your use of drugs or 
alcohol.
      	
Your use of alcohol or drugs has hurt your relationships with others.
      	
You have not been able to fulfill important role obligations (such as household 
chores, financial responsibilities, or caring for children or other loved ones) as 
a result of drinking or using.
      	
You have lost interest in hobbies or things you used to enjoy (such as spend­
ing time with friends or family) while increasing the time you spend drinking or 
using.
Persistent Use Despite Negative Consequences
      	
Despite your awareness of one or more negative effects of alcohol or drugs 
on some aspect of your life or ability to function, you find yourself continuing 
to drink or use drugs anyway.

How Addiction Happens
15
Impairment or Distress Resulting from Use
      	
You have not taken good care of yourself (for example, not eating well or not 
practicing good hygiene) because of your alcohol or drug use.
      	
Drinking or using drugs has caused or worsened existing psychological or 
medical problems (such as depression, anxiety, or cardiovascular disease).
If you marked any of the signs and symptoms that go beyond tolerance and with­
drawal, you have, at a minimum, experienced alcohol-­ or drug-­related problems. Some 
people experience such problems without actually being addicted, and they decide to 
quit or cut back on drinking or using. These are very healthy choices, because having 
had the experiences described on the checklist suggests that you may be at risk for 
greater problems (including addiction) if you continue to drink or use. In the Resources 
section you will find resources for learning about controlled drinking or harm reduction 
approaches to the use of alcohol or drugs. The goal of harm reduction is to reduce, 
but not quit, drinking or using. It is important for you to know, however, that this 
workbook is written for those who suffer from addiction and are open to an abstinence-­
based program of recovery.
This exercise is not intended to substitute for a formal diagnosis of addiction. It 
will, however, help you to reflect on the way your use of alcohol and drugs has 
affected your life. If you have not been evaluated professionally, your responses may 
provide some indication of whether it would be a good idea to find out more about 
the seriousness of your problem and consider treatment that extends beyond 
self-­help.
If you think that you may have an addiction, but you are not sure, then you 
should be evaluated by a professional right away. Ideally you should seek out a profes­
sional with expertise in addiction. Appropriate professionals may include medical 
doctors, psychologists, counselors or therapists (with a master’s degree in either psy­
chology or social work), or admissions counselors at addiction treatment facilities.
How and Where to Seek Professional Help
Finding the appropriate professional to conduct a careful evaluation of your addic­
tion symptoms is not always easy, especially if this is a new problem or if you have 
never seen a professional to help you with mental or emotional problems. If you have 
seen a mental or behavioral health professional in the past or are currently working 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
16
with someone whom you trust, even if that person has not helped you previously 
with problems related to your alcohol or drug use, it is a good idea to share your con­
cerns with that person, and ask them (1) if they have training and experience that 
will enable them to assess or treat you for this type of problem, and (2) if not, whether 
they can recommend an addiction expert whom you can see for an evaluation. If you 
don’t have a mental health professional to work with but you have a primary care 
doctor with whom you feel comfortable, you can request a referral to an addiction 
specialist from your doctor. It is always an advantage if you can get a referral from a 
trusted medical professional to someone else with whom they have worked. That way, 
the referring professional has a good sense of the quality of the person or program to 
which you’re being referred.
Sometimes people feel hesitant to talk with their doctor or counselor about alcohol 
or drug use because they are worried that the information will be shared with a 
family member or someone else. Remember that there are very strict privacy laws 
that prevent doctors and other professionals from sharing anything you tell them 
about your alcohol or drug use with anyone else without your explicit permission 
(unless you share information that indicates that you may seriously harm yourself or 
another person).
When you talk with a doctor or other professional for the first time about your 
concern that you might have a drug-­ or alcohol-­related problem, there are three key 
elements you can introduce to the conversation to help make it go smoothly and 
minimize your discomfort:
1.	  Let the person know how hard it is for you to talk about this. This will set the tone 
for the conversation and engage the person’s feelings of empathy toward 
you.
2.	 Describe your concerns succinctly and straight to the point, without going into detail 
until the person asks questions. This will help you to get your point across 
clearly, and then, as you get a sense of the other person’s reaction and your 
comfort level with the conversation, you can decide how much detail you 
are comfortable sharing.
3.	  Make a direct request for what you hope to get out of the conversation. If you are 
seeking a referral, ask for it directly. If you are concerned about your privacy 
and confidentiality concerning what you are revealing, express that directly 
and ask that the information be kept confidential.

How Addiction Happens
17
Finding the Words
Let’s take a look at how Charlie expressed the need for professional help, using the 
three key conversation elements described above. Even though Charlie felt that he 
couldn’t help himself when he stole the checks from his mother, he struggled with 
intense guilt and shame afterward, and he began to recognize that he was losing 
control over his behaviors surrounding his use of Adderall. Even though part of him 
didn’t want to give up Adderall, perhaps a greater part of him realized that he was 
acting in ways that were concerning and that he needed professional help.
Charlie had a pediatrician whom he really felt he could trust. His pediatrician 
treated him for general health issues all the way up until he went away to college, 
and even though he felt self-­conscious about approaching him to talk about the 
problems he was having with Adderall, he didn’t feel ready to talk with his parents 
about it. He knew, however, that it was only a matter of time before his mom would 
notice the checks he had stolen from her and that, sooner or later, the truth would 
come out. Charlie realized that if he needed to tell his mom about his drug 
problems, he would be better off doing that with the advice of a professional. So he 
called his pediatrician, Dr. Amira.
Charlie:	
	Hi, Dr. Amira. Thank you for taking the time to talk with me.
Dr. Amira:	
You’re welcome, Charlie. What’s going on?
Charlie:	
	Well, this is very difficult for me to talk about because I feel worried 
for myself and, at the same time, very ashamed about this problem that 
I am having. So please bear with me.
Dr. Amira:	
Okay.
Charlie:	
	Before I tell you about the problems I’ve been having, I need to ask you 
about the confidentiality of the things that I tell you. Are you able to 
talk with me about some issues I’m having without sharing what I say 
with my family?
Dr. Amira:	
Yes, Charlie. Everything you say to me is completely confidential, 
unless you tell me something concerning about your safety or the 
safety of someone else, such as expressing an intention to harm 
yourself or another person. Or if you tell me about someone who is 
being abused—­under those circumstances I would need to report what 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
18
you tell me to protect you or someone else who is in danger. But 
anything else that you say to me will stay between us.
Charlie:	
	Thank you. It helps to know that. The reason I called is because you 
are the only person I trust to tell about what has been going on with 
me. I started using Adderall to stay up and study for finals, and I’m 
concerned that I may have become addicted to it.
Dr. Amira:	
Yes, Adderall can be highly addictive. Let me be sure I understand you, 
though. Did anyone prescribe it to you, or were you getting it some 
other way?
Charlie:	
	(pausing, a little bit hesitant and embarrassed) Well, I feel bad admitting 
this, but I got it from a friend at first. Nobody is prescribing it to me. 
The reason I was calling is because I think I need a professional to 
evaluate me and help steer me in the right direction, and I was hoping 
that you might know of an addiction specialist in the New York City 
area whom you could recommend.
The three key elements in the sample dialogue—­all of which emphasize direct­
ness and encourage empathy—­can help you not only when you are asking a profes­
sional for a referral, but also when you’re communicating with friends and family 
about your participation in addiction treatment. We will come back to communica­
tion skills and rehearse them later, in chapter 4.
Returning to the issue of finding a competent professional to evaluate you, if you 
don’t have a doctor or other treatment provider whom you can ask for a referral, you 
have a few other options. First, if you’d like to speak with a doctor who has specialized 
training in addiction, there are a number of professional organizations you can go 
through. See the Resources chapter at the end of this workbook for some examples.
Apart from individual providers such as physicians or therapists, addiction treat­
ment programs are staffed with various qualified professionals who can evaluate your 
symptoms. It may be reassuring to remind yourself that making an appointment for 
an evaluation doesn’t mean that you are committing to entering treatment. The 
Resources section at the end of this workbook contains some links to useful search 
engines for treatment programs.
Browsing the options on these websites, while very informative, can also be over­
whelming if you don’t know what you’re looking for. There are certain questions that 

How Addiction Happens
19
you will want to ask when you’re looking for a treatment program, to get a sense of 
the quality of the program and whether it can meet your individual needs. Some 
examples of key questions to ask, and the responses you’d look for in a quality 
program, are provided in the following table.
Questions to Ask When Seeking Treatment
Question
Desired Responses
Is the treatment approach 
you use supported by 
scientific studies?
Behavioral therapies and medications are the most 
well studied approaches. A combination of the two 
is ideal.
Can you describe the 
types of behavioral 
therapies you use in 
your program?
The behavioral therapies with the most scientific 
support include cognitive behavioral therapy, 
motivational interviewing, and motivational 
incentives.
Do you provide medicines 
to treat addiction 
symptoms directly?
Medications can be prescribed to help a person to 
stop abusing alcohol or drugs, or to prevent relapse. 
Whether they are prescribed will depend on the 
program. Examples of medications a treatment 
provider might mention are naltrexone, vivitrol (an 
injectable form of naltrexone), acamprosate, 
methadone, or suboxone (also known as 
buprenorphine).
What range of services 
do you offer to tailor the 
plan of treatment to my 
individual needs?
In addition to drug abuse treatment, ideally the 
program will provide other services to address your 
unique individual needs. These may include 
psychiatric assessment and treatment for other 
conditions (such as depression or anxiety), medical 
treatment (including medical detoxification from 
drugs or alcohol if needed), family therapy, 
vocational programs to assist with returning to 
work or seeking employment after treatment is 
complete, self-­help groups, and social services.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
20
What type of continuing 
care is provided after I 
finish the treatment 
program?
Since ongoing management of your addiction is 
crucial for treatment success, many programs offer a 
continuing care or aftercare therapy group in which 
you can continue to receive support after you have 
“graduated” from the program. Inquire about 
therapy or supportive groups you can participate in 
once you’ve completed treatment. If none are 
provided, then you’ll want to discuss how ongoing 
care plans will be developed for longer-­term 
management of your addiction after you finish 
treatment.
Is drug or alcohol use 
monitoring included in 
the program?
To be sure that your individual needs are being 
met, ongoing drug testing should be part of your 
care, so that if you relapse during treatment, your 
treatment plan can be adjusted accordingly to 
maximize your chances of treatment success. A 
healthy treatment philosophy is that relapse does 
not indicate failure; it means that the treatment 
plan needs to be revisited and individualized to 
address the specific problems that are being 
encountered.
How long is treatment?
Research studies show that at least three months of 
treatment is usually needed to effectively help you 
to stop using alcohol or drugs and maintain your 
treatment benefits. Studies generally show that the 
longer a person stays in some form of treatment, 
the better.
Is 12-­step self-­help part 
of the program?
The social support from 12-­step groups can be 
helpful both during and after treatment has ended. 
Ideally, getting you engaged in a 12-­step program 
will be part of your treatment.

How Addiction Happens
21
What Makes You Vulnerable
Why me? you might find yourself asking. Why is it that some people can take or 
leave alcohol or drugs, experiment with them (even heavily), and then just turn the 
page as though it never happened? You can probably think of at least a handful of 
people like this whom you’ve known or even used to drink or use with. Now they just 
drink or smoke pot here and there, socially. Maybe they even get a little too drunk 
or high from time to time, but for the most part, they keep it under control.
Why can’t I do that? you may wonder. Many people who seek out help for their 
alcohol or drug use find themselves, at some point in the process, wishing they could 
be that person who could take it or leave it. You might find yourself fantasizing about 
drinking or using socially at some point, and it is normal to want to be able to do 
that. The loss of control over drinking or using drugs that you’ve experienced is not 
normal, and addressing that effectively might mean giving up your “ideal” of drink­
ing or using in moderation, at least for now. It doesn’t mean that for everybody, but 
clearly the least risky path to long-­term recovery from addiction is to quit using alto­
gether. Coming to terms with the reality of that can be very hard.
Although there is no single reason that can explain why you are more vulnerable 
than some of your friends or family members, studies have shown that there are 
common risk factors that increase the likelihood that a person will develop an addic­
tion. The worksheet below will help you to identify some of your personal risk factors.
Exercise 1.2: Personal Risk Factors
Below you will find a list of biological, environmental, and other conditions that increase the 
risk for addiction. Place a check mark beside those conditions that you have experienced.
      	
You have at least one family member who suffers from addiction.
      	
You have had depression, anxiety, post-­traumatic stress disorder, or other psy­
chological problems.
      	
Your parents or other role models used alcohol or drugs excessively around 
you when you were growing up.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
22
      	
Your parents or other role models engaged in criminal behavior consistently 
when you were growing up.
      	
You had friends and acquaintances at school who were using drugs and 
alcohol when you were in your teens.
      	
You had trouble in school as a child (for example, a learning disability or poor 
grades).
      	
You had difficulty making or keeping friends or feeling like you “fit in” with your 
peers when you were growing up.
      	
There was a lot of chaos and conflict at home when you were growing up (for 
example, lots of fighting between the adults in your home).
      	
You were physically or sexually abused.
      	
You started experimenting with alcohol or drugs as a child or in your early teen 
years.
      	
You have smoked or injected drugs.
      	
You had some traumatic experiences in your life prior to starting to use alcohol 
or drugs excessively.
The more risk factors you have, the more vulnerable you are, so if you have lots of 
check marks above, it will help you to make sense of why you’ve been affected by 
addiction. But even if you didn’t check off anything on the list, or if you checked off 
only one or two risk factors, you can still develop drug or alcohol addiction.
How could that be? you might wonder. For starters, it is important to remember that 
these risk factors do not each have an equal influence on whether or not you become 
addicted. For example, genetic factors (such as whether or not you have an immediate 
family member with addiction) explain between 40 and 60 percent of a person’s vul­
nerability to addiction (Kendler et al. 2000; Tsuang et al. 1998; Tsuang, Stone, & 
Faraone 2001). Although many people with family members who suffer from addic­
tion do not themselves become addicted, among those who do develop an addiction, 
the genetic vulnerability is usually paired with conditions in the environment that 
“activate” problem drinking or drug use (Enoch 2012).
For example, when a person who is genetically vulnerable grows up in a chaotic 
home environment, where he or she is abused and witnesses a parent or role model 

How Addiction Happens
23
abusing alcohol or drugs, these conditions can “activate” the genetic tendency to 
drink or use drugs excessively. Even with a perfectly healthy home environment, a 
person who suffers from depression or anxiety and is exposed to a peer group that is 
using drugs or alcohol would be more likely to develop an addiction than a person 
who experienced either one of these conditions alone.
Wrap-­up
In this chapter, you’ve learned some important things about yourself. You explored 
some of the unique aspects of your history, family, and life experiences that placed 
you at risk for addiction. You also identified your symptoms of addiction. You can 
reflect on this list any time you need to strengthen or remind yourself of your motiva­
tion to keep on actively working on your recovery.
If you aren’t in treatment already, you now have some guidance about how to ask 
health care professionals whom you know and trust to help you identify one or more 
treatment providers with specialty training in addiction. You can also access some 
helpful resources at the end of this workbook to enable you to do some research on 
treatment on your own, and you are armed with good questions that will help you to 
find the treatment program that is the best fit for you. In the next chapter, you will 
deepen your understanding of the way addiction has affected you biologically and 
how some of the effects of these substances on the brain can explain your loss of 
control over alcohol and drugs.


CHAPTER 2
Addiction Is a 
Brain Disease
A
t the beginning of this book, you read about how the brain’s ability to “put 
on the brakes” and control impulses malfunctions when you become addicted 
to something. As a result, you get stuck in go mode even when giving in to 
your impulses can be harmful to you. In this chapter, you will learn more about how 
excessive alcohol and drug use alters the brain, and how science-­based medication and 
psychological treatments for addiction can help the brain heal in recovery. You will 
also become familiarized with some of the medications that are available to promote 
this healing process.
As you hopefully have started to process by now, you have a disease, and it is 
serious. The bad news is that this disease can be very destructive and not only ruins 
but also takes lives every single day. The good news is that it is very treatable. People 
can and do get better, and you can be one of them. In this workbook, you are going 
to learn the most effective behavioral therapy techniques that are used in addiction 
treatment. By practicing the combination of these strategies that are uniquely helpful 
to you personally, you can increase your chances of getting better. Let’s take a look at 
how addiction affects the brain, and what you can do to help yourself heal.
The Mind on Drugs Is Not Rational
Though the stigma that follows the illness of addiction is far from gone, advances in 
medicine and science have deepened society’s understanding of addiction as a chronic 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
26
disease. As the word has spread about this in the popular media, and more celebrity 
faces have either come forward or tragically lost their lives to addiction, the growing 
curiosity about addiction has provided an opportunity to educate the public about 
the seriousness of the illness.
In this process, addiction experts in the media have at least partially debunked 
some of the myths about addiction being a “moral failing” or a “choice.” Even though 
the initial decision to drink or use drugs is made by voluntary choice, research has 
shown that as alcohol or drug use progresses to addiction, the ability to make rational 
choices becomes affected (NIDA 2010). Because the ability to choose rationally is 
what enables us to choose healthy behaviors, take care of ourselves, and act as moral 
and ethical human beings, the impact of excessive drug use on the brain can be dan­
gerous and disabling. As drug use becomes compulsive, the “choice” to use is not 
made in the rational way that we make most other choices in life.
Most of the choices we make involve weighing the pros and cons of doing one 
thing versus another. For example, let’s take a look at the thought process of someone 
who has never been addicted to alcohol or drugs. Jody gets invited to a party by 
some friends from work. The party happens to be the day before she has an impor­
tant meeting that she will need to prepare for. She goes to the party and her friends 
are drinking and smoking pot. In deciding whether or not she is going to drink and 
smoke, a lot of thoughts go through her mind—­thoughts such as If I smoke and drink 
with my friends, this is going to be a lot more fun, and I don’t want to come across like a party 
pooper. As she tries to figure out a solution, she has thoughts such as Maybe I can party 
with my friends on another night, and If I don’t perform well at the meeting, how will that 
affect me?
Though the decision-­making process may appear simple, the thoughts that run 
through Jody’s mind reflect a complex process of reasoning and judgment that enable 
her to plan what to do next. Maybe the plan will be to stay a short time at the party 
so that she will not be overly tempted. Maybe the plan will be to have just one drink 
and skip smoking pot this time. This is the process that a “rational brain” goes through 
to arrive at a decision. Whether or not the decision turns out to be the best one, it 
comes at the end of a rational thought process.
When you are addicted to something, that rational process becomes impaired; 
your actions in relation to using drugs and alcohol become dominated by your 
impulses, while the part of your brain that controls reasoning, judgment, and weigh­
ing pros and cons malfunctions. Here’s why:

Addiction Is a Brain Disease
27
How Drugs Act in the Brain
From the time we’re born, our brains are wired to reward pleasurable experiences. 
For example, when we eat something that tastes delicious or when we hear music that 
we enjoy, our brain’s reward system releases brain chemicals that produce feelings of 
pleasure. These brain chemicals (also known as neurotransmitters) are part of the 
brain’s communication system. The nerve cells in your brain release these chemicals, 
which act as “messengers.” They carry messages between nerve cells. When you eat 
something delicious, a nerve cell releases a neurotransmitter called dopamine. This 
nerve cell is the one that is “sending” the message. The message has to be received for 
you to experience pleasure. What happens next is the dopamine attaches to another 
“receiving” nerve cell. Once the message has been received, any “extra” dopamine 
that remains in the space between the two cells (known as the synapse) is recycled or 
brought back into the “sending” nerve cell.
What do you feel when all of these messages are going back and forth in the 
nerve cells in your brain? When it involves the release of dopamine, the brain’s 
natural pleasure chemical, you feel great, and you want to repeat the behavior. 
Alcohol and most drugs that people become addicted to interfere with the brain’s 
communication system. Their chemical structure is so similar to some of our natural 
brain chemicals, like dopamine, that they can convey a “false” message to a nerve 
cell, causing it to release unusually large amounts of dopamine. They can also prevent 
extra dopamine from being recycled, so that it continues to send messages to other 
nerve cells. Dopamine starts flooding the brain’s reward system, and the system 
becomes overstimulated. When triggered by alcohol or another drug, the brain 
releases two to ten times more dopamine than it does when you eat something deli­
cious or have another natural and pleasurable experience like listening to music or 
having sex (Di Chiara and Imperato 1988). The exaggerated sense of pleasure, or 
euphoria, that you experience when this happens leads to an intense desire to repeat 
the experience.
Our natural pleasure response involving dopamine was designed to promote sur­
vival. The experience of pleasure that we get from eating, intimacy, and other enjoy­
able activities is the reason that we repeat these acts. These acts are vital; without 
food and human contact we cannot stay healthy or live for very long. But the plea­
sure response that is triggered by repeated alcohol and drug use has the opposite 
effect—­rather than promoting survival and well being, it causes emotional and 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
28
physical suffering, a diminished ability to experience pleasure, and a diminished ability 
to carry out life-­sustaining activities (such as working, eating, and taking care of 
yourself), while at the same time compelling a person to continue to drink or use.
As destructive as this cycle is, biologically it actually makes sense. Here’s what 
happens: with repeated drug or alcohol use, the brain’s production of dopamine 
becomes depleted, and with less dopamine available in the brain, using alcohol or 
drugs just doesn’t work as well to produce that intense euphoria or high. And neither 
does anything else, for that matter. When we don’t have enough dopamine in our 
brains, the things that used to bring us pleasure just don’t do the trick anymore; this 
loss of pleasure can lead to depression, hopelessness, and a lack of interest in the 
things that we once enjoyed.
When people are in this predicament, not only do they feel the need to drink or 
use drugs to try and bring their dopamine back to the way it used to be, but they 
need to use larger amounts of alcohol and drugs to trigger that same dopamine rush 
they experienced back when all of this started. This is known as tolerance. You may 
recall from chapter 1 that tolerance is one of the warning signs that a person is at risk 
of transitioning from social use of alcohol or drugs to addiction. You may also have 
heard the popular expression “chasing that first high.” That’s when you keep on 
trying, in vain, after becoming addicted to something, to get back to a high that is 
just like the first one you ever had on it. As you are now learning, the trouble is, once 
you build up tolerance, you just don’t have enough dopamine to get to that place 
anymore. That is why, when you cross that threshold and become addicted, the 
“chase” can never be satisfied.
In the longer term, addiction leads to other brain changes that make it hard to 
give up your use of alcohol and drugs. The parts of your brain that work together to 
enable you to control and plan rational behavior, such as the frontal lobe, can be 
damaged by excessive alcohol or drug use. At the same time, brain chemicals that 
influence your ability to learn can become depleted, causing problems with your 
ability to think and reason. When this happens, seeking out ways to get and use 
alcohol or drugs can come to resemble a habit that a person repeats without even 
realizing it. It becomes like a reflex, something you do automatically without 
thinking—­especially when you’re in a place or with a person you associate with 
drinking or using. In fact, understanding how people, places, and things can be asso­
ciated with drinking or using is going to be a very important part of overcoming your 
addiction.

Addiction Is a Brain Disease
29
How Addictive Behavior Is Learned
If you know a little bit about psychology, you have probably heard of Pavlov and 
his scientific experiments. Pavlov was interested in learned behavior, especially a 
process called associative learning, in which a pair of stimuli or experiences can become 
associated with one another. In his famous experiment using his dog, Pavlov found 
that if he rang a bell just before feeding his dog, and he did this over and over again, 
his dog could learn to anticipate or expect that the food was coming just upon hearing 
the bell ring. This became apparent to Pavlov when the dog began salivating every 
time he heard the bell, even before he could see or taste any food. The learned asso­
ciation between the sound of the bell and the experience of eating was so strong that 
the dog developed what is called a conditioned response to the bell. Salivating is a con­
ditioned response that is designed to prepare the body to eat.
In the same way that Pavlov’s dog learned that the bell was a cue that signaled that 
food was coming, people can “learn” addictive behaviors. When you drink or use 
drugs frequently around certain people or in certain places, you learn to associate 
those people or places with the experience of being high or intoxicated. People and 
places become “cues” just like the bell in Pavlov’s experiments. These cues create an 
anticipation of drinking or using drugs and all of the feelings that go along with being 
intoxicated or high. That anticipation can create an intense urge or craving.
Emotions can become cues as well; when you drink or use drugs repeatedly when 
you are in a certain emotional state (for example, when you are angry, sad, or nervous), 
then the emotional state itself can become a conditioned cue. For these reasons, being 
around people, places, or things (such as emotions) that remind you of drinking or 
using can trigger powerful cravings that are so uncomfortable that drinking or using 
seems like the only choice. These cravings are your conditioned response to drug and 
alcohol cues.
Retraining the Brain
When Pavlov’s dog salivated in response to the bell, it was like a reflex. When 
addiction takes hold, your reactions to alcohol or drug cues can become very auto­
matic, much like reflexes. Our most basic reflexes are controlled by the lower, more 
primitive part of our brains, including the brainstem. Can you recall a time when you 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
30
found yourself drinking or using and you couldn’t recall how you even decided or 
started to drink or use? If so, that is because the addicted part of your brain was 
driving your behavior.
We will continue to refer to your addicted brain throughout this workbook; this is 
the part of your brain that will tempt and drive you to fulfill your impulses. These 
impulses make you feel like you “need” to drink or use, especially when you encoun­
ter cues that trigger cravings. To overcome your addiction, you will need to learn to 
purposely retrain the more sophisticated, rational part of your brain, which involves 
your frontal lobe. As you work your way through the exercises in this book, this is 
exactly what you are going to learn to do!
We will also refer to your rational brain throughout the workbook, to highlight the 
ways in which the addicted and rational parts of your neurobiology will conflict, and 
help you train your rational brain to become stronger. The frontal lobe controls ratio­
nal behaviors. These behaviors are the outcome of a decision process, the kind that 
involves considering the pros and cons of your actions and choosing between 
alternatives—­just as Jody did when she had to decide whether to drink and smoke 
pot the night before an important meeting.
When you learn to use your rational brain to make decisions about drinking or 
using in recovery, you will tune in to your cravings so that you realize what is hap­
pening in your body and mind in that moment, have an internal dialogue about it, 
and then choose how to respond to it, rather than reacting to it automatically, like a reflex. 
Because of the way your brain has been affected by drug or alcohol use, your auto­
matic, reflexive reaction will be to drink or use drugs in many situations. Learning to 
control that reflex is what recovery is all about. You will learn how to do this in chap­
ters 3 through 10.
The following table summarizes some of the brain structures and chemicals that 
are affected by addiction, and how these brain changes influence behavior.

Addiction Is a Brain Disease
31
Brain Effects of Drugs and Alcohol: 
How They Affect Behavior
Brain Structure/Chemical That is 
Affected
Result of Brain Changes (Addictive 
Behavior)
Dopamine is released in abnormally 
large amounts.
Experience of euphoria, leading to 
strong motivation to repeat drug use.
Dopamine production is reduced overall 
(with repeated substance use).
Loss of ability to experience pleasure 
from drugs or other activities that used 
to be enjoyable.
Glutamate (a brain chemical that 
influences our ability to learn) 
concentration is altered.
Loss of cognitive abilities (including 
effects on memory, concentration, 
ability to understand information and 
think rationally).
Frontal lobe changes.
Compromised ability to resist impulses 
and make planned, rational choices 
about behavior.
Changes in Hypothalamic-­Pituitary-­
Adrenal Axis (part of the body’s stress 
response system).
Compromised ability to cope with 
stress, leading to intensified anxiety or 
discomfort. Increased likelihood of 
drinking or using in the face of stress, 
as it becomes more difficult to plan or 
select a healthy coping response.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
32
How Treatment Works
You might be wondering, If addiction is a brain disease, then how exactly does treatment fix 
that? Just as much of your addictive behavior has been learned, recovery-­oriented 
behaviors are also learned. You can’t erase your brain’s memories of using drugs and 
alcohol in response to various conditioned cues—­whether those cues are people, 
places, or things. Those cues will probably make you uncomfortable by triggering 
cravings for a while. But you can learn new responses to those cues, while you give 
your brain the time it needs to heal. The longer you are able to remain abstinent from 
alcohol or drugs, the greater your chances of successfully living without drinking or 
using in the long term. In part 2 of this workbook, you will learn three sets of thera­
peutic skills to help you achieve abstinence from alcohol or drugs: cognitive behav­
ioral therapy, motivational techniques, and mindfulness strategies.
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). CBT is a therapy approach that has been 
used very effectively to help people with a wide range of problems, including addic­
tions of all kinds, mood and anxiety disorders, weight control, chronic pain manage­
ment, and other mental and physical health conditions. When applied to changing 
addictive behaviors, CBT is also referred to as relapse prevention therapy. The tech­
niques offered by CBT are based on the understanding of addictive behaviors as 
learned, conditioned responses to people, places, and things that have been associ­
ated with drinking and using. The goals of CBT are to help you (1) understand how 
your addictive behaviors were learned and conditioned; (2) identify the people, places, 
and things that have been conditioned to bring on cravings to use substances (in 
other words, your triggers); and (3) learn healthy coping responses to these triggers 
that enable you to remain abstinent from drug or alcohol use.
CBT is probably the most well studied form of psychotherapy for addictions. 
There have been literally dozens of clinical trials comparing CBT to other forms of 
addiction treatment, and the results consistently show that this approach effectively 
reduces drug and alcohol use for people with various types of addictions, including 
stimulant (Rawson et al. 2004), marijuana (Budney et al. 2006), alcohol (Annis and 
Davis 1989), and opioid addictions (Church et al 2001; McAuliffe 1990; Pollack et al. 
2002; Stein et al. 2004).
Motivational techniques. If you’re like most people in recovery, since the day you 
first realized that you needed to do something about your addiction, your intention 

Addiction Is a Brain Disease
33
to quit drinking or using has been at times clear and strong, while at other times less 
certain, or even completely absent. This could vary from day to day, or even from 
hour to hour. It is simply a reflection of the ambivalence, or mixed feelings, that all 
of us have when we are going to make a difficult change. Motivational therapy tech­
niques help you to figure out the source of your ambivalence and resolve it so that 
you can move your life forward and commit firmly to making changes (Miller, 1983).
Motivational therapy techniques help you to explore your own ideas about how 
recovery could change your life, so that you can come to your own conclusions about 
it and become the driver of your recovery plan. Studies show that this approach is 
helpful for motivating people with addictions to attend therapy (Hettema, Steele, and 
Miller 2005), and when you combine motivational techniques with CBT, they are 
especially useful for helping you to quit using alcohol and drugs (Glasner-­Edwards et 
al. 2013; Rohsenow et al. 2004). In chapter 3, you will complete motivational exer­
cises to help you resolve ambivalence you might have about quitting drinking or 
using, and strengthen your commitment to your recovery.
Mindfulness-­based relapse prevention. Mindfulness, one of the most well-­studied 
forms of meditation practice, is a tool that has been recently introduced to the world 
of addiction treatment. Originally part of Buddhist meditation practice, mindfulness 
was adapted more than thirty years ago for use in a stress reduction program that was 
developed by Jon Kabat-­Zinn (1982). Since that time, mindfulness has been used 
effectively to help with a range of psychological problems, including depression, 
anxiety, grief, and stress in individuals with serious medical problems. Mindfulness 
meditation, which you will learn about and practice in chapter 7, focuses on two core 
skills that can help you in your recovery: (1) learning how to be present in the moment, 
using awareness of your breath as a tool; and (2) learning to accept your experience 
just as it is, without judging yourself for it or trying to change it. As you will learn in 
chapter 7, these skills can be helpful to get you through a craving or to cope with 
another unpleasant emotion without turning to alcohol or drugs.
Medications
Medication is an option in the treatment of alcohol and certain drug addictions; 
and for some (for example, opioid addiction), it’s crucial, as highlighted by a recent 
quote in Time magazine by one of the leaders in the field of drug addiction treatment, 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
34
Dr. Richard Rawson. Discussing use of the medication buprenorphine (which you 
will learn more about below) as a means of preventing opioid overdose deaths, which 
have increased in recent years, Rawson states, “Failure to encourage patients to use 
these medications is unconscionable. It’s comparable to conducting coronary bypass 
surgery and failing to prescribe aspirin, lipid, and blood pressure medications as part 
of a discharge plan” (Time, Feb 2, 2014).
Combining medication with behavioral therapy techniques can be a very effective 
way of treating addiction. The techniques in this workbook are compatible with the 
use of medication, which may also help you to achieve a long enough period of time 
without relapsing that you can engage more fully in the psychological skills–building 
process. Most of the medications for addictions work in one of three ways: (1) by 
minimizing the intense cravings that often stand in the way of successfully quitting 
drug or alcohol use; (2) by blocking or preventing the “high” or “rush” that you expe­
rience when you use alcohol or drugs, making substance use less appealing; or (3) by 
substituting for or “replacing” the drug that you are addicted to, keeping a steady 
level of a similar chemical in the system. Although historically the idea of using a 
medication or “drug” to treat a “drug problem” has been controversial, as addiction 
has become better understood as a chronic illness requiring ongoing treatment, much 
like diabetes and heart disease (McLellan et al. 2000), medications for addiction have 
been demonstrated scientifically to save lives, reduce deaths by overdose, improve 
overall quality of life, and enable people with addictions to flourish as productive 
members of society.
The table that follows summarizes the available medications that are approved by 
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and currently used, most successfully in 
combination with behavioral therapies. There are a few additional medications that 
are not FDA-­approved but have been studied in clinical trials and show promise for 
the treatment of addictions; these include Topamax, Zofran, Seroquel, and baclofen. 
For more information on medications that can be used to treat addiction, you can 
visit the website of the National Institute on Drug Abuse: http://www.drugabuse.gov.

Addiction Is a Brain Disease
35
FDA-­Approved Medications Used to Treat Addiction
Medication
How It Works
Naltrexone
Treats alcohol and opioid addictions. Available in a 
form that can be taken orally (Revia) or by injection 
(Vivitrol). Blocks the pleasurable feelings if a person 
drinks or takes opioids while on it. Reduces cravings.
Acamprosate
Used to treat alcoholism. Available in oral form 
(Campral). Reduces alcohol cravings.
Disulfiram
Used to treat alcoholism. Available in oral form. Makes 
the person feel ill if alcohol is consumed.
Methadone
Treats opioid addiction. Available in oral and injectable 
forms. Used for opioid detoxification and to prevent 
relapses. Reduces withdrawal symptoms and cravings.
Buprenorphine
Treats opioid addiction. Available in oral/sublingual 
(under the tongue) form. Used for opioid detoxification 
and to prevent relapses. Reduces cravings and blocks 
the euphoria, or pleasurable feelings, if a person uses 
opioids.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
36
The Brain Heals; So Do You
As strong as the evidence is that addiction has damaging effects on the brain, 
scientific studies have shown that the brain has a remarkable potential for recovery. 
In one study, using brain imaging techniques, the researchers studied images of the 
brains of people who were addicted to methamphetamine, looking at changes in the 
images repeatedly over fourteen months of recovery and comparing them to healthy 
individuals who had never used drugs. They found that, over time, the brain’s poten­
tial to make dopamine, which was quite compromised at the beginning of the study, 
gradually recovered among those who remained abstinent from drugs (Volkow et al. 
2001).
Even more recently, a group of scientists completed a similar brain imaging study, 
except that this study was designed to find out whether behavioral therapy for addic­
tion could produce changes in brain activity in areas of the brain that are thought to 
be damaged by addiction. The researchers found that individuals who received cogni­
tive behavioral therapy to treat their addictions showed improvement from the start 
to end of treatment on a test of impulse control and other cognitive abilities. They 
also showed changes in brain areas that control rational decision-­making and “self-­
control,” or the ability to control your responses to your impulses (DeVito et al. 
2012).
What does this mean for me? you might be wondering. It means that, with the right 
therapeutic skills in place, such as those you will learn in this workbook, not only can 
you learn to control your behavior as it relates to drug and alcohol use, and recover 
your ability to make healthy decisions, but you can experience pleasure again from 
ordinary, naturally enjoyable experiences. When drugs and alcohol take hold and you 
lose control, it is easy to feel hopeless, especially when the depression sets in. The 
great news about these scientific studies is that they show that your life can return to 
normal if you receive treatment using the techniques we are focusing on in this work­
book, and are able to remain abstinent from drugs and alcohol.

Addiction Is a Brain Disease
37
Wrap-­up
By now, you have a deeper understanding of how addiction affects the brain. Many 
of your addictive behaviors can be explained by the neurobiological changes you have 
endured from your drug or alcohol use. In this chapter, you learned how rational 
decision-­making is affected by chronic drinking and drug use. We reviewed how 
addictive behaviors are learned, and how they can become automatic. The therapy 
techniques you will learn in the chapters that follow can help you to learn new 
responses to the cues that previously triggered alcohol or drug use. By “relearning” 
how to respond to these cues in a healthy way without drinking or using, you are 
strengthening your rational brain, while disengaging from your addicted brain. This 
will allow you to heal and rebuild your ability to make rational choices. In the next 
chapter, we will begin working on strengthening your motivation for recovery.


PART 2
Overcoming Addictive 
Behaviors


CHAPTER 3
Step 1: Strengthen 
Your Motivation and 
Commit to Change
H
ave you ever wondered why it is that you can feel entirely convinced one 
day that drinking or using is something that has become toxic in your life, 
yet the next day, or even the next hour, you can find yourself coming up 
with reasons why it might be okay to drink or use just one more time? Believe it or 
not, there are theories in psychology about why this happens, because in reality, it 
happens to a lot of people—­and not just people who are trying to quit using drugs 
and alcohol. This shift in motivation is something that people experience when they’re 
trying to make all sorts of life changes, whether it’s trying to eliminate a behavior 
that is not good for them (like overeating or overspending) or starting something new 
and healthy (like exercising, taking medications regularly, or eating right).
In this chapter, you are going to learn about why your motivation to change 
important behaviors might shift around from day to day, or over longer periods of 
time. You will be introduced to a theory of behavior change that explains the differ­
ent stages of motivation to change your use of alcohol or drugs, and how these changes 
influence your recovery. Next, you will do a self-­assessment to get a sense of where 
you are in your motivation and commitment to changing your drug and alcohol use, 
and you’ll complete exercises that help you to strengthen and sustain your motiva­
tion. You can revisit these exercises anytime you feel that you need a little psychologi­
cal “boost” to remind you of why you are going to all of this trouble to cut back or 
quit.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
42
How We Change
Psychologists have spent decades trying to understand the process of behavior change. 
What has to happen inside of our minds to motivate us to change behaviors that have 
been habits for a very long time? One of the most well-­studied theories about this is 
called the transtheoretical model of behavior change (Miller 1996). In the addiction 
treatment field, this model has been widely used to understand and improve motiva­
tion for recovery. According to this theory, there are five different stages of motiva­
tion for change, involving thinking about, planning, starting, and sustaining behavior 
changes. No matter where you are in the cycle, you can move back and forth between 
the stages, and every person moves through the stages and changes at a different 
pace. Let’s take a look at the different stages:
•	 Precontemplation: The first stage in the cycle is called precontemplation. 
This is the stage when you’re not even really aware that you need to make 
any changes to your behavior. Maybe others around you have taken notice 
of your alcohol or drug use and are talking to you about their concerns, but 
it hasn’t registered for you personally. Since you’ve picked up this work­
book, you are more than likely beyond this stage, but you can probably 
remember a time when you felt a little burdened and maybe even defensive 
about other people’s concerns regarding your use of drugs and alcohol, 
because you didn’t share them. That was when you were in the precontem­
plation stage.
•	 Contemplation: The second stage is just what it sounds like—­it is when 
you’re starting to think about the possibility of changing. The themes that 
would be going around in your head in this stage are maybe I need to make 
some changes, or maybe drinking isn’t good for me anymore, or maybe I can’t control 
my drug use anymore. At this stage, you’re starting to realize that your current 
behavior patterns are not matching up with the way you want your life to 
be.
•	 Preparation: When you enter the third stage, you are convinced that you 
need to change your behavior and you begin planning for it. This would be 
the stage when you start exploring ways that you can get help with your 
alcohol or drug use. Some signs that you are in the preparation stage could 
include:

Step 1: Strengthen Your Motivation and Commit to Change
43
•	 Making an appointment to see an addiction specialist
•	 Considering different treatment options for your addiction
•	 Setting a date for when you are going to quit drinking or using
•	 Reading through this book and planning to start the exercises
•	 Action: When you enter the action stage, you have initiated the plans you 
made during the preparation stage. This could mean that you have started 
treatment, are working your way through the exercises in this book, have 
started to go to mutual self-­help groups (such as 12-­step meetings), or have 
already cut back or quit your use of alcohol or drugs.
•	 Maintenance: When you’ve been able to remain consistent in making the 
changes you committed to in the action stage for six months or longer, you 
will transition to the maintenance phase. For example, if your action stage 
involves quitting your use of alcohol or drugs, you would move into the 
maintenance stage once you’ve been sober for six months.
Of course, in the process of recovery from addiction, a slip or relapse can naturally 
interrupt your progression through this sequence of stages, but it doesn’t have to put 
you right back at the beginning. The way that you respond to a relapse makes a huge 
difference in your ability to regain momentum in your recovery. If you catch yourself 
early, and are able to prevent a slip from turning into a full-­blown relapse, you can get 
right back into the action phase, rather than winding back to an earlier phase and 
feeling “stuck” there. Throughout this section of the book, you are going to learn 
skills that help you to understand and move beyond a slip before it gets out of hand.
Exercise 3.1: What Stage of Change Are You In?
Review the above descriptions of the five stages of change. Circle which stage you are in with 
regard to your motivation to change your alcohol or drug use:
Precontemplation 
Contemplation 
Preparation 
Action 
Maintenance 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
44
Now, circle the rating that describes how motivated you are to take the necessary steps 
to achieve abstinence, on a scale from 0 to 10, with zero being not at all motivated and 10 
being the most motivated:
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10
Not Motivated 
Somewhat Motivated 
Motivated 
Highly Motivated
Looking at your responses to these two items, there are a few things to keep in mind. First, 
if you circled Action or Maintenance, congratulations! You’re well on your way to a healthier 
new chapter of your life. Keeping your motivation strong will be important to sustain the 
changes that you are already making, so be sure to complete the exercises in this chapter. 
If you circled Preparation, this chapter is an ideal place for you to solidify your reasons for 
initiating a change and moving into Action. If you circled Precontemplation or Contemplation, 
then it’s great that you are getting educated about addiction by reading this book and con­
sidering whether making a change to your alcohol or drug use is something that you’d like to 
pursue further. On the rating scale, if you gave yourself less than a 5, you are probably in an 
early stage of change (such as precontemplation or contemplation). If you gave yourself a 5 
or above, some part of you—­whether it is just a small part or all of you—­has already decided 
to take steps to change your alcohol or drug use.
Regardless of which stage of change you are in, take a look at your self-­rating for 
motivation, and ask yourself this question: What would it take to move me up just one more 
point on the scale? If you don’t know the answer to that right now, don’t worry. As you 
consider the pros and cons of changing your alcohol or drug use, as well as the reasons 
why it might be worth changing, you will get a better idea of how to answer that 
question.
Ambivalence: It’s Normal in Recovery
No matter how motivated you feel about your recovery and its importance in your 
life right now, it is very normal to feel ambivalence, or mixed feelings, about the process 
of changing your behavior and lifestyle (Prochaska, DiClemente, and Norcross 1992). 
Even though your use of alcohol or drugs has caused problems for you that have led 
you to think about changing, there was a reason that you started drinking or using 
in the first place. The reason was, it was doing something that felt good or helpful to 

Step 1: Strengthen Your Motivation and Commit to Change
45
you—­whether it was making you feel positive emotions or enhancing your ability to 
function in some way, or removing unpleasant feelings.
It is important to acknowledge that there were some positive rewards that you got 
out of drinking or using back when you started, and the hope to continue to get those 
benefits can lead you to have mixed feelings about giving it up, even if you haven’t 
experienced many positives from drinking or using for a while. Those memories are 
powerful, and your addicted brain will tempt you to seek out alcohol and drugs in 
attempts to repeat these positive experiences. As you examine your motivation for 
change, you will begin the process of strengthening the power of your rational brain 
to control your addictive behaviors.
If you’re anything like most people who enter recovery, you’ve been using alcohol 
or drugs for a while, so it may be hard to imagine life without it. You might even feel 
like you’re setting yourself up to fail, because you don’t believe that you can change 
successfully. These anxieties are completely normal. The good news is that they are 
not rational! Why is that good news? Because once you recognize that your thoughts 
or feelings are irrational, it’s easier to change them. The reality is, many people who 
have been drinking and using for a long time are able to give it up and turn their lives 
around. It’s not easy, but with a solid recovery plan—which you’re building with the 
help of this workbook—and the right support in place, it is entirely possible.
In the next section, you’ll consider some of the pros and cons of continuing to 
drink or use versus cutting back or quitting your use of alcohol or drugs. One thing 
to keep in mind as you complete this exercise is that the immediate or short-­term 
benefits of drinking and using (such as improving your mood) are often the exact 
opposite of the longer-­term effects, which come a little bit later. These can include 
depression or other mood disturbances, and the inability to get important things 
done. Being realistic about these short-­ and long-­term effects is important so that you 
can take an honest look at the full range of benefits and drawbacks that come with 
each possible decision (such as continuing to drink or use versus changing your use 
patterns).
Exercise 3.2: Resolving Your Ambivalence
The best way to resolve any mixed feelings you might have about changing your use of drugs 
or alcohol is to give some serious consideration to the benefits of stopping your use and 
weigh them against the things about drinking or using that you will miss. In this exercise, 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
46
you’re going to think about this in four different ways. First, you’re going to think about the 
reasons why you drink or use—­the positives. Here are a few examples of things people like 
about drinking or using:
•	 It helps with anxiety.
•	 It helps with relaxation.
•	 It provides an escape from things that are difficult to cope with.
•	 It can be fun.
•	 It breaks the ice in social situations.
Second, you’re going to think about some of the negative things that happen when you 
drink or use. This will help motivate you to change your behavior, especially if you can keep 
this list in mind when you experience a craving. Here are some negative effects of drinking or 
drug use that you might experience:
•	 It causes health problems, including physical discomfort when the substance wears 
off, getting sick, and longer term effects of certain substances (for example, liver 
damage, heart disease, and oral health problems).
•	 It causes or worsens psychological symptoms or illness, such as anxiety and depression.
•	 It creates financial problems.
•	 It leads to relationship difficulties.
•	 It causes you to have difficulties meeting your obligations at work, school, or home.
Third, you’ll come up with a list of the benefits of reducing or quitting. Some of the ben­
efits that you might discover are as follows:
•	 Feeling better physically
•	 Having more predictable and stable emotions
•	 Becoming more productive
•	 Improved relationships (this happens more gradually, usually)
•	 Feeling better about yourself
•	 Saving money

Step 1: Strengthen Your Motivation and Commit to Change
47
Fourth, you’ll spend some time thinking about the things you will miss about drinking or 
using. Some of the drawbacks of reducing or quitting your use of alcohol or drugs might 
include:
•	 Missing the immediate positive effects of drinking or using on your mood or your 
ability to do certain things
•	 Losing or distancing yourself from friends you like because they might tempt you to 
drink or use
•	 Feeling more limited in the range of social or work activities you can participate in 
comfortably
•	 No longer being able to lean on alcohol or drugs to cope with stress or problems
Now, complete your own matrix below of the pros and cons of reducing or quitting sub­
stance use versus continuing to drink or use drugs. Be as open and honest as you can when 
you make this list; the better you understand the sources of any mixed feelings you have about 
this, the more equipped you will be to talk yourself through them when the urge to drink or 
use comes up.
Benefits of Reducing or Quitting		
  Drawbacks of Reducing or Quitting
1. 	 	
	
	
	
  	
	
  1. 
	
	
	
	
  	
	
	
  
2. 	 	
	
	
  	
	
	
  2. 
	
	
	
	
  	
	
	
  
3. 	 	
	
	
  	
	
	
  3. 
	
	
	
	
  	
	
	
  
4. 	 	
	
	
  	
	
	
  4. 
	
	
	
	
  	
	
	
  

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
48
Benefits of Continuing to Drink or Use	   Drawbacks of Continuing
1. 	 	
	
	
	
  	
	
  1. 
	
	
	
	
  	
	
	
  
2. 	 	
	
	
  	
	
	
  2. 
	
	
	
	
  	
	
	
  
3. 	 	
	
	
  	
	
	
  3. 
	
	
	
	
  	
	
	
  
4. 	 	
	
	
  	
	
	
  4. 
	
	
	
	
  	
	
	
  
To use the results of the matrix to help you in your recovery, find a place where you can jot 
down the drawbacks of continuing to drink or use, as well as the benefits of reducing or quitting 
your use. Some people like to store this in their notes on their cell phone, or even on their cell 
phone wallpaper for a more consistent reminder. For others, writing it down on a little index 
card or slip of paper and carrying it around (in a wallet or purse) can be useful. Pull out the 
card or look at the list on your phone any time you experience a craving, to remind yourself of 
what you are getting out of your recovery, as well as what you stand to lose if you slip or relapse.
Remember that your addicted brain will persuade you to drink or use by enticing you with 
memories of the acute, or short-­term, positive effects of alcohol or drugs. The negatives and 
drawbacks of drinking and using typically come afterward. But if you start thinking about them 
before you make the decision about whether or not to drink or use, you will strengthen your 
rational brain and increase your chances of successfully overcoming a craving without relapsing.
Boosting Your Motivation
Earlier in this chapter, you rated your motivation to reduce or quit drinking or using. 
You were also thinking about what it would take to move your rating up by at least 

Step 1: Strengthen Your Motivation and Commit to Change
49
one point, to make your motivation stronger. The exercise you are going to complete 
next will give you some things to think about that might help you answer that ques­
tion. It will involve answering some questions to help you consider more carefully the 
concerns that you have about your drinking or drug use, the impact of your use on 
your life now and in the future, and your confidence in your ability to abstain from 
alcohol or drugs.
First, let’s look at an example.
Carrie Considers Change
Carrie has been smoking pot on a daily basis for the past eight years. In general, 
she’s been very functional for most of that time. She’s held down a few different 
jobs as a production assistant in the television industry, she’s had a long-­term 
relationship (which she recently ended), and she has kept up a pretty active social 
life. Lately she’s been noticing that she has a lot of anxiety. She has found herself 
obsessing about past decisions (such as breaking up with her most recent boyfriend), 
and questioning whether they were right or wrong. She has also noticed that she’s 
been thinking a lot about her career and wondering why she hasn’t really advanced 
from the level of assistant to something a little higher up.
These thoughts have had a depressive effect, leading her to smoke pot more 
often than before. Since this cycle started, Carrie has felt less motivated to get out 
and do the things she normally enjoys, like socializing, exercising, and spending 
time with her family. She has noticed a connection between smoking pot and 
feeling depressed and anxious, which she wasn’t aware of before. Although smoking 
pot helps her to detach from a lot of the things she is unhappy about, Carrie has 
noticed that when she smokes more heavily, she enters a period of several days of 
not feeling like herself. On those days, she feels sad, irritable, and extra tired, and it 
takes a big effort for her to focus on things she needs to do at work and at home.
Carrie goes to see a psychologist for an evaluation, and one of the themes that 
they discuss is the connection between her use of marijuana and the problems she 
has been experiencing. When she comes to the appointment, Carrie is in the 
contemplation stage of change concerning her use of marijuana—­she is starting to 
put together some thoughts about how it is affecting her, but she does not yet have 
a plan in mind about what she is going to do about it. She rates her motivation to 
change her marijuana use at a 5. She is somewhat motivated, but she has some 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
50
ambivalence about it, especially since she’s been using pot for so long and doesn’t 
think it has affected her in many negative ways. Carrie’s psychologist suggests that 
she consider four aspects of her thoughts about marijuana that will help her explore 
her ambivalence and strengthen her motivation to make a change:
•	 Recognizing Marijuana Use as a Problem: Is it a problem or isn’t it a 
problem? It may sound like a simple question, but when you have mixed 
feelings about the idea of changing your behavior, you may find yourself 
questioning whether your hunch (that drinking or using is the source of 
some, or even most, of your problems) is correct. Carrie’s psychologist asks 
her some questions about how she has noticed marijuana causing problems 
for her, and what kinds of things it’s interfering with. These questions lead 
Carrie to the following observations:
•	 It is having an effect on my mood.
•	 It is increasing my anxiety.
•	 It interferes with my ability to concentrate and be productive at work.
•	 It interferes with my motivation to do things I normally love doing, like spending 
time with my friends and family.
•	 I’m wondering if it might be holding me back from getting further in my career. (If 
I had more energy and motivation, maybe I would be more proactive.)
•	 Concern About Marijuana Use: Often people who seek help for alcohol-­ 
or drug-­related problems say that they have family members or friends who 
have expressed concern about their use. Though this is very important, and 
often sets the wheels in motion for exploring the problem further, there is 
nothing more powerful for motivating change than your own concerns about 
the effects of your behavior on your life. Carrie’s psychologist asks her to 
reflect on her own worries about her marijuana use. She asks Carrie to 
imagine what she fears will happen if she continues to smoke pot as much 
as she does right now for the next year or more. In other words, what is she 
concerned will happen if she doesn’t make any changes? Carrie expresses 
the following concerns:
•	 I could become more depressed and anxious.

Step 1: Strengthen Your Motivation and Commit to Change
51
•	 I might become very isolated.
•	 If I keep on going to work spaced out after I’ve been smoking pot heavily, I might 
start making mistakes and I could get into trouble.
•	 I could start gaining weight. I’m already exercising less, and I get hungrier when 
I’m smoking a lot of pot.
•	 Intention to Change: Recognizing that you have a problem with alcohol 
or drugs is one thing, but translating that recognition into action is a whole 
other process. Getting from that point of realizing that you have a problem 
to committing to making a change is a big and important step. It’s a process 
of deciding that change is needed, and that making a change can lead you 
to a better place in your life than where you are now. Carrie’s psychologist 
asks her to think about why changing her marijuana use is necessary, and 
how her life will be different if she is able to change successfully. Carrie’s 
responses are as follows:
•	 I need to stop smoking so that I can find out if it’s the marijuana holding me back 
from making progress in my career.
•	 I need to stop using marijuana so that I can be myself again—­this depressed, 
anxious person I’ve become just isn’t me.
•	 If I were able to stop smoking pot, I think I would be a happier, more energetic 
person.
•	 If I were able to stop smoking pot, I think I would be moving up the ladder at 
work.
•	 Optimism: Do you believe that you can successfully change your use of 
alcohol or drugs? If you have your doubts, you are not alone. This may be 
one of the most challenging changes you make in your life. But studies 
show that if you can find reasons to believe in yourself and your ability to 
win this battle, you will boost your chances of succeeding (Kelly and Greene 
2014). This confidence in yourself is called self-­efficacy. To help improve 
Carrie’s self-­efficacy, her psychologist asks her to think of reasons that she 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
52
can believe in her ability to succeed in her recovery. Here are the reasons 
she comes up with:
•	 I’m a very strong person. When I’m determined to do something, I always follow 
through.
•	 I have a strong support system for my recovery. My friends will support me, and 
I have several who don’t smoke pot and will be very happy to see me finally quit.
•	 I’ve made other difficult changes before—­like when I quit smoking cigarettes—­and 
I succeeded at those.
After Carrie completes this exercise, she finds that she has reached a new level of 
self-­understanding about the ways that marijuana use has been affecting her life, 
her concerns about the effects it could have on her in the future, the things that 
could change for the better if she were to change her use of marijuana, and the 
reasons she has to be confident that she can change her marijuana use. After 
reflecting on all of these things, she finds that her motivation rating has changed 
from a 5 to a 7.
Exercise 3.3: Motivation for Change
Now it’s your turn to consider your thoughts about alcohol or drugs in the same four areas 
that Carrie did. This exercise will help you to explore your ambivalence about changing and 
express your motivation for change in your own words.
1.	 Consider whether alcohol or drug use is a problem for you.
	
What kinds of problems have you had in relation to your use of alcohol or drugs? Describe 
them here: 
	

	

	

	


Step 1: Strengthen Your Motivation and Commit to Change
53
	
How has your use of alcohol or drugs interfered with, or stopped you from, doing things 
you wanted to do?
	

	

	

	

2.	 Think about what concerns you about your alcohol or drug use. 
	
Is there anything that worries you about your use? Is there anything you can imagine hap­
pening to you because of it? If so, describe your concerns here: 
	

	

	

	

	
What, if anything, are you worried will happen if you don’t cut back or stop drinking or 
using?
	

	

	

	


The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
54
3.	 Think about how changing your alcohol or drug use will affect your life.
	
What makes you think that you might need to cut back or quit your use of alcohol or 
drugs?
	

	

	

	

	
If you change your use of alcohol or drugs successfully and things work out the way you 
want them to, how do you imagine your life will be different?
	

	

	

	

4.	 Think about the reasons that you can believe in yourself and your ability to 
change.
	
What inspires you to believe that change is possible for you? 
	

	

	

	


Step 1: Strengthen Your Motivation and Commit to Change
55
Now that you have given more thought to your motivation to change your alcohol or 
drug use, let’s revisit the motivation rating that you completed earlier. Circle the rating that 
describes how motivated you are to take the necessary steps to change your alcohol or drug 
use on a scale from 0 to 10, with zero being not at all motivated and 10 being the most 
motivated:
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10
Not Motivated 
Somewhat Motivated 
Motivated 
Highly Motivated
Did your rating change from earlier? If so, that is great news! You will find that keeping 
that rating as high as it can be is something you may need to work at during different stages 
of change—­even the maintenance stage. The reason for this is that at every stage of change, 
those ambivalent or mixed feelings about drinking or using can (and naturally do) come up. 
Even when you’re completely stable in your recovery, you may find yourself tempted to drink 
or use occasionally, and then you’ll need to revisit the potential benefits and drawbacks of 
that choice, to take a realistic look at your motivation for sobriety.
If your motivation rating did not change from earlier in this chapter, that is perfectly okay; 
maybe it was high to begin with and these exercises were simply a reminder of your reasons 
for that. If your motivation was not so high to begin with and it did not change, then it is 
good that you are being honest about where you are, and you can revisit the exercises in this 
chapter any time you think that you might have some perspective to add to strengthen your 
motivation. Working with a therapist might also be helpful.
Finally, whether you moved up on the scale or not, don’t hesitate to push yourself further. 
By asking yourself what it would take for you to increase your rating by just one more point, 
you can continue to strengthen your motivation. Keeping the issue of your motivation on your 
mental radar is a big part of making it solid and maintaining it.
Wrap-­up
By now, you have a better understanding of the psychology of behavior change, the 
specific stage of change that you’re currently in, the strength of your motivation to 
change your alcohol or drug use right now, and your reasons for wanting to change. 
This understanding is the foundation for your recovery, but it is just the first layer. 
Next, you need a plan for how you are going to go about establishing the support that 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
56
you need to succeed in achieving your goals. You also need skills that will enable you 
to plan for and get through difficult situations without drinking or using.
As you move through the next six chapters of this workbook, you will learn to 
apply cognitive behavioral, motivational, and mindfulness-­based skills to the specific 
types of triggers, temptations, and roadblocks you face in your recovery. By the time 
you finish with section 2 of this book, your personalized relapse prevention plan will 
be in place and you will have mastered the tools that are the most helpful to you to 
achieve long-­term recovery.

CHAPTER 4
Step 2: Set Yourself 
Up to Succeed
I
n the last chapter, you explored and strengthened your motivation for recovery. 
Now that you have clear in your mind the reasons why you want and need to 
change your use of alcohol or drugs, it is time to make certain adjustments in 
your life that will set you up for the smoothest possible road to recovery. To maxi­
mize your chances of success, you will need to be prepared for the challenges that 
come along in early recovery. Many of these are going to be right in front of you, in 
your immediate environment; they can include people, places, and things that trigger 
urges to drink or use. Some of these triggers will be easier for you to manage than 
others. This chapter will prepare you to anticipate these challenges and plan ahead 
for them.
You’re going to learn about several different ways to be prepared for the obstacles 
that lie ahead: First, you’ll learn about why you’ll need to get things that might tempt 
you to use out of your home environment. You’ll also learn how to be mindful of your 
recovery when making everyday decisions that can affect it. And you will read about 
the importance of introducing an exercise program into your recovery plan. Next, 
you’ll give some thought to your social life, and ways to increase your social support 
for recovery. Finally, you’ll learn how to enhance your current close relationships and 
enlist the help of your loved ones in your recovery by using assertive communication.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
58
Get Rid of “Stuff” That Helps You 
Drink Or Use
As your addiction developed, you formed very powerful associations between drink­
ing or using and the “stuff” that you used to do it. What kind of stuff? you might be 
wondering. That depends on what your preferred substance is. Let’s take pot, for 
example. Rolling papers, bongs, and pipes are examples of the different types of things 
that helped you to use. Now, those things themselves, because of the strong associa­
tion in your mind between them and using pot, can trigger very strong urges to get 
high. For someone who has just stopped smoking pot, opening a drawer and finding 
a pipe in it can create a powerful craving. For this reason, getting all of that stuff out 
of your immediate environment (your home, backpack, purse, car, or anywhere else 
you keep it) is one of the very first steps you will need to take to prevent a slip or a 
relapse. If your preferred substance is alcohol, then you might need to get your favor­
ite wine glass or shot glass out of your home. Or if you’ve injected any drugs, then this 
would mean getting needles or syringes out of your environment. And most impor­
tant of all, having your substance itself within reach is an extremely powerful trigger. 
So if you have leftover pot, alcohol, pills, or other substances that you are trying to 
quit using in your home, you’ll need to get rid of those as well.
If you’re like most people in early recovery, this is not exactly music to your ears. 
You probably have some questions about these rules, and you may have some objec­
tions. Before we address those, take a moment to think about the importance of your 
recovery in your life, and the reasons you listed in the last chapter for quitting. Look 
back at the list if you can’t remember all of them off the top of your head. Think 
about how motivated you are to quit, and whether you are ready to take the neces­
sary steps to do so successfully, even if they are hard at first.
Below, you’ll find some very common concerns and reactions that people have to 
the idea of getting rid of their “stuff” (also referred to as paraphernalia), followed by 
some “recovery friendly” ways to think about these concerns.
•	 Concern: Why do I have to get rid of all of this stuff? It has value; I hate to throw 
it away.

Step 2: Set Yourself Up to Succeed
59
Recovery mindset: Although it’s true that all of these things cost money, 
think about how much continuing to drink or use will cost you, both finan­
cially and in other ways. Your priority right now is to put as many barriers 
between yourself and a relapse as you can. Having all of this stuff around 
makes it easy for you to drink or use on a whim. Your goal is to create more 
barriers. The value of your paraphernalia is nothing compared to the value 
of your new life in recovery.
•	 Concern: What if somebody comes over and wants to have a drink, but I’ve gotten 
rid of all of my alcohol?
Recovery mindset: Because drinking alcohol is socially acceptable and 
common, this is a common sticking point. Having alcohol around to please 
others is something to rethink, even though you may need some time to 
come to terms with the risk that this poses to you. Here’s the inner dia­
logue to try and adopt to help you prioritize your recovery: If having alcohol 
in the house makes me more vulnerable to relapse, then I can’t afford to have it here. 
My guests will learn to accept that my place is alcohol-­free. If it’s really important for 
them to drink, we can plan a social gathering at a restaurant, where they can order a 
drink.
•	 Concern: I should be strong enough to have that stuff around me without using it.
Recovery mindset: A lot of people in early recovery come into it with the 
idea that willpower is a sign of progress. But there is a saying that has been 
used in some of the most effective CBT-­based treatments for addiction: “Be 
Smart, Not Strong!” (Rawson et al. 2004). What that means is, testing 
yourself in an attempt to prove that you have willpower or strength will 
place you at risk for a relapse. We know from research studies using brain 
imaging that being exposed to visual triggers (such as seeing paraphernalia) 
for as little as thirty-­three milliseconds can activate the addicted part of 
the brain and start a craving (Childress et al. 2008). You can’t always 
control whether you are exposed to a trigger, but whenever possible, it is 
better for your recovery to be smart and avoid it than to try to be strong 
enough to resist it, placing yourself at risk for relapse.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
60
Exercise 4.1: Paraphernalia
Below you’ll find a list of some of the things to remove from your immediate environment. 
Check off the ones that apply to you:
      	
Alcohol
      	
Pills
      	
Marijuana
      	
Any other drugs that you’ve used (even if not your preferred substance)
      	
Lighters
      	
Mirrors
      	
Ashtrays
      	
Pipes
      	
Rolling papers
      	
Bongs
      	
Needles
      	
Phone numbers (of dealers or contacts you use to find drugs)—­delete from 
your phone
      	
Medical marijuana card
Other paraphernalia to get rid of: 





Step 2: Set Yourself Up to Succeed
61
Now that you’ve identified the things to remove, you need a plan. Do you feel 
confident that you can get rid of these things on your own, or do you need someone 
to do this with you? You can turn to a loved one who is supportive of your recovery, 
a 12-­step sponsor if you have one, or an addiction treatment provider or counselor. 
Make a point of not procrastinating about this; once all of those temptations are out 
of your way, things will begin to get a little bit easier.
Become Aware of Seemingly 
Irrelevant Decisions
One of the most important psychological adjustments you will make as you enter 
recovery is to recognize that a lot of your decisions, from now on, need to be made 
carefully, with your sobriety in mind. There are decisions you will make about where 
to go, with whom to socialize, and what kinds of things to do for fun that can have 
a profound effect on your recovery, even if they don’t seem related. Seemingly irrelevant 
decisions are just what they sound like—­they are little decisions that you make every 
day that may not seem, at the moment, to have any potential impact on your sobri­
ety, because they don’t involve drinking or using directly. But they can move you 
closer to a relapse if you’re not aware of them. Let’s look at an example:
Jonathan Gets Triggered
Jonathan is a cocaine addict in early recovery. Jonathan was at a friend’s house 
watching the Super Bowl. When his team won, he and his buddies were so excited 
they wanted to celebrate. His friend Scott suggested that they head down the block 
to the karaoke bar. Jonathan hesitated for a moment. Since he’d used cocaine and 
alcohol together in the past, his recovery plan involved abstinence from alcohol as 
well as cocaine. After a quick deliberation, he thought, Well, why not? I’ll just sip on a 
soda or something. When they got there, a bunch of other good friends of theirs were 
already waiting for them. “Hey, Jonathan!” called an old college buddy, Gregory, 
from the bar. “I’ve got your drink all ready for you right here!” When Jonathan 
walked up, he saw the ice-­cold beer sitting there on the table, and it was just too 
hard to resist. I’ll just have a beer; what’s the big deal? he thought. After one round 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
62
turned into a few and his friends were still having a good time, one of his buddies 
told him that he had some cocaine. Although alcohol was not Jonathan’s “drug of 
choice,” drinking had been linked with cocaine use for him in the past. That night, 
Jonathan wound up relapsing on cocaine.
Thinking about Jonathan’s relapse, what thoughts come to mind about 
seemingly irrelevant decisions? For one, Jonathan was not thinking of the bar as a 
risky place. Going with his buddies to a bar after the game was a decision that was 
seemingly irrelevant to his recovery from cocaine addiction. This is a common 
mistake in thinking; when you expose yourself to a substance that is not your 
“drug of choice,” it can still make you vulnerable to relapse to be in a situation 
where drinking or using are going on, because it takes you outside of the recovery 
mindset. This is especially true in early recovery, when you are very vulnerable—­
more so than you might think.
Jonathan also had a plan not to drink alcohol just in case, but that did not work 
out so well once he was exposed to temptation and social pressure, when his friend 
had a drink sitting there waiting for him at the bar. This was part of the chain 
reaction (starting with the decision to go to the bar) that led Jonathan to relapse to 
cocaine. With alcohol in his system, Jonathan’s judgment was not as good as it 
might have been otherwise. Tracing the situation all the way back to the beginning, 
Jonathan’s seemingly irrelevant decision was going to the bar. If he had opted out of 
the post-­game karaoke bar celebration, he would not have relapsed.
Here are a few suggestions to help you avoid making seemingly irrelevant deci­
sions that will put you at risk:
•	 Create an awareness of the importance of your moment-­to-­moment deci­
sions as they affect your recovery.
•	 Consider your full range of options when confronted with a choice that 
could impact your ability to stay sober.
•	 Think about the potential risks and benefits of each choice that you can 
make.
•	 Choose the option that will be the most protective of your recovery.

Step 2: Set Yourself Up to Succeed
63
•	 If you end up choosing a risky option, be prepared with an exit plan or a 
relapse prevention strategy in place (such as calling a sponsor or supportive 
friend if you get triggered or bringing someone with you who will help keep 
you motivated for recovery).
Exercise Promotes Addiction Recovery
As you work your way through this chapter and begin thinking about ways of putting 
new behaviors into place to increase your chances of recovering successfully, you 
should be aware of what some of the most recent research on physical exercise in 
addiction recovery has shown. Everybody knows that physical exercise is good for 
overall health; you’ve probably heard somewhere that exercising regularly promotes 
both physical and mental well-­being. The current guidelines from the Centers for 
Disease Control recommend two hours and thirty minutes of moderate aerobic exer­
cise per week (Centers for Disease Control 2015), which can translate to about thirty 
minutes of aerobic activity (like walking, jogging, bicycling, or dancing) five days per 
week. Muscle strengthening exercises (such as resistance training) are also recom­
mended twice per week. Sound tough to commit to? Well, it’s true that if you’ve been 
out of practice for a while, establishing a consistent regimen is not easy at first. But 
the exciting news is, there is a good reason to put in the effort: more and more studies 
have shown that physical exercise has beneficial effects on addiction recovery.
According to a recent series of studies (Rawson et al. 2015; Dolezal et al. 2013; 
Mooney et al. 2014), people in addiction recovery who do aerobic and muscle strength­
ening exercise according to the guidelines enjoy many positive mental and physical 
health benefits: they become more physically fit, they lose weight, they show improve­
ments in psychological symptoms of depression and anxiety, and they are more suc­
cessful in reducing their drug use, compared to a group of addicts in recovery who 
receive education about health without being involved in a regular exercise program.
In this same series of studies, it was also found that those who exercised during 
recovery showed changes in their brain cells. They had more of the brain’s pleasure 
chemical, dopamine, available after they exercised regularly for two months. This is 
important because it means that when you exercise in recovery, it can help restore 
your ability to experience pleasure and joy—­and that can really serve you well, 
­protecting you from one of the most common reasons that people relapse: negative 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
64
emotions, including feeling unable to enjoy things. Now that new knowledge has 
shown that physical exercise can help you to stay sober and improve your mental 
health, it can become a very important and enjoyable part of your recovery plan.
One of the keys to success in making a commitment to exercise is to find some­
thing that you actually enjoy doing for exercise. Think about what you enjoy—­do you 
like outdoor activities, like hiking, walking, jogging, or rock climbing? Do you enjoy 
swimming? Or are you someone who likes to dance, go to the gym and use exercise 
equipment, or do some other indoor exercise activity? Whatever you try, be sure it 
isn’t something that feels like a chore. If you’ve had the experience of counting down 
the minutes until a physical activity is over, then be sure that you don’t select that 
one again! If you can find something you like to do, once you find the time to do it 
regularly, you won’t want to stop. That’s the exercise activity you’re looking for. Try 
to work daily exercise into your recovery plan. It will help you feel good about your­
self, cope with any negative emotions that might be coming up for you, and stay 
sober. Now take a moment to think about what kind of activity might work for you 
to help you get “hooked” on exercise.
Exercise 4.2: Selecting and Committing to an 
Exercise Activity
Some of the physical activities that I enjoy are:
1.	 
2.	 
3.	 
4.	 
5.	 

Step 2: Set Yourself Up to Succeed
65
I will commit to trying 	
	
	
	
	
	
 on 
(date).
If it turns out not to be my top choice for a regular exercise activity, as an alternative, I will try 
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 on 
 (date).
Once I select my preferred activity, I will spend 
 minutes on this activity
         days per week.
One way to increase the likelihood that you will follow through on your commit­
ment is to keep track of your follow-­through on it, and reward yourself for maintain­
ing your commitment. Think of some ways you might reward yourself for exercising. 
You can do something you enjoy afterward—­buy a little something for yourself, enjoy 
some leisure time with a friend, or do something relaxing (like taking a bubble bath, 
sunbathing, or watching a favorite TV show). The point is to acknowledge your 
achievement. And be sure that you make the connection as you reward yourself, 
telling yourself that the reward is for exercising. You can use the exercise log below to 
track your progress.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
66
Exercise 4.3: Exercise Log
This log is where you can write down how often you exercise, and record when you reward 
yourself for it. Try and make a point of rewarding yourself for exercising at least once, if not 
twice, per week. Use this log as consistently as you can over the next few months, as an aid 
to establishing a regular exercise regimen.
For the week of: 
Day
Exercise Type / 
Minutes Spent
Reward
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
I met my goals for this week (circle):		
Yes	
	
No
I rewarded myself one or more times for exercising (circle):	
Yes	
	
No

Step 2: Set Yourself Up to Succeed
67
Taking Stock of Your Social Support Network
Studies show that social support for your recovery has a strong influence on your 
success in staying clean and sober (Kelly et al. 2012). This means that the more 
quality relationships you have with people who are supportive of your efforts to stop 
using alcohol or drugs, the more likely you are to be able to achieve and sustain your 
sobriety in the long run. Some people come into the recovery process with a lot of 
loving, supportive people around them who really “get it” and know how to be helpful. 
But some don’t. Some have loving people around, but those people don’t really under­
stand their addiction as a disease, and don’t know how to support them in the right 
way. You may have a mix of all of these types of people in your life. Regardless of how 
your support system may seem right now at this moment, there are ways to build and 
adjust it, such as:
•	 Making new friends who are in recovery
•	 Breaking or limiting contact with friends who are triggering
•	 Leaning on your existing friends and family who are the most helpful and 
understanding
•	 Using assertive communication with the ones who want to help but don’t 
know how (teaching them how to be helpful to you, if they are willing to 
learn)
•	 Going to marital or family therapy
The first step is to take stock of the social network that currently exists in your 
life, and figure out which people, of those you are close to and spend time with, are 
sources of social support for your recovery, as well as who might be triggering for you. 
People who are triggering are usually either those who drink or use drugs themselves, 
and have done so around you, or those who are a source of conflict and negative emo­
tions that ultimately lead to urges to drink or use.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
68
Exercise 4.4: Safety Nets Versus Risky Relationships
In this exercise, you are going to think about whom you might consider a “Safety Net” for 
you, and which people or relationships are risky. Safety Nets are people who are supportive 
of your recovery and who won’t do things to jeopardize it (such as offering you alcohol or 
drugs, or behaving in ways that are triggering for you). Risky relationships are those that do 
the opposite of your Safety Nets—­these are relationships with people who would tempt you 
to use through their own drug or alcohol use, or through their behavior toward you. Take a 
moment to think about friends, family members, coworkers, a 12-­step sponsor, or anyone 
else who is part of your social network, and list them under the appropriate category.
Safety Nets	 	
	
	
	
  Risky Relationships
1. 	 	
	
	
	
  	
	
  1. 
2. 	 	
	
	
  	
	
	
  2. 
3. 	 	
	
	
  	
	
	
  3. 
4. 	 	
	
	
  	
	
	
  4. 
5. 	 	
	
	
  	
	
	
  5. 
6. 	 	
	
	
  	
	
	
  6. 
Now, looking at this list, ask yourself whether you have at least a few solid Safety Nets 
whom you can count on to support you when you are having a hard day or need someone 
to talk to. If not, don’t despair. There are ways to build this up, which we’ll talk about momen­
tarily. Also take a moment now to think about your risky relationships. There are a few ways 
to deal with the risky people in your life, depending on who they are and how much contact 
you need to have with them:
•	 Avoid: There are certain risky relationships that you’ll want to avoid altogether. Friends 
with whom your primary connection was all about drinking or using are generally too 
risky to be around. Dealers or people who used to supply you with drugs are people 
you should break connections with and avoid.

Step 2: Set Yourself Up to Succeed
69
•	 Limit contact: There may be some risky people you can’t avoid entirely (such as 
coworkers you used to drink or use with after hours), but with whom you can limit your 
social contact.
•	 Set limits: There may be people (family members, close friends, a spouse, or other 
loved ones) who are triggering to you but are not people you can or want to avoid 
altogether. The key in those relationships is to set limits.
Setting Limits: Assertive Communication
Learning to communicate assertively can be a very useful tool in your recovery. First, 
let’s think about what it means to be assertive. There are three different communica­
tion styles. On the more reserved extreme, there are passive communicators. If you are 
passive, you tend to:
•	 Keep your feelings inside
•	 Avoid making requests of other people
•	 Keep your wants and needs to yourself
The problem with this communication style is that you can end up letting other 
people take advantage of you, leading you to feel defeated or resentful because your 
needs aren’t met. And feeling defeated or resentful can fuel other negative emotions, 
like depression.
If you are at the other extreme, you might be an aggressive communicator. If you 
are aggressive, you tend to:
•	 Demand what you want
•	 Take advantage of others
•	 Deliver your communication with a hostile, rude, or angry tone
The problem with this style is the disrespect it conveys to other people, which also 
can have the effect of isolating you from others, since it causes others to create dis­
tance from you to protect themselves.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
70
Assertive communication is the middle ground that can help you express your 
needs effectively during your recovery. When you communicate assertively, you:
•	 Speak respectfully to others
•	 Can make requests of other people without coming across as demanding
•	 Praise or thank others for the good or helpful things they do
•	 Speak your mind in a way that doesn’t make others feel put off
•	 Express yourself in a healthy way, rather than stuffing your feelings
There are many benefits of being assertive. When you are communicating assert­
ively, you are in control of your emotions and your way of expressing them. This 
inspires respect from others, making it more likely that they will be willing to meet 
your needs or requests, and inviting healthy and open communication in return. You 
might be wondering why this is so important for your recovery, and that is a very 
good question. Let’s look at a few scenarios.
Rick’s Dilemma
Rick is an alcoholic who has just recently gotten sober. He lives with his girlfriend, 
Tanya, who is a social drinker. She likes to drink wine with dinner occasionally, 
and she also likes to host dinner parties, during which she usually serves alcohol. 
There have been many occasions when, after having friends over, Rick and Tanya 
have gotten into arguments because of his drinking. Tanya is very happy that Rick 
is in recovery, but they haven’t had any conversations about how she can be helpful 
to him.
Tanya has continued to drink wine with dinner a few times a week, and she has 
had a couple of parties recently during which she served alcohol while Rick was 
around. At the most recent party, Rick was tempted to drink, but he knew that 
Tanya would get upset if he relapsed. So he waited until she fell asleep that night, 
and with the urge still very strong, he went into the kitchen and poured himself a 
drink for the first time in over a month. He ended up having five drinks that night 
before he went to bed.

Step 2: Set Yourself Up to Succeed
71
Rick’s situation is a common one. It is very difficult to go into recovery and 
succeed in your efforts to avoid drinking or using when a partner or close friend con­
tinues to actively drink or use around you. At the beginning of this chapter, we dis­
cussed the importance of removing alcohol, drugs, or anything in your environment 
that is associated with drinking or using, to eliminate as many temptations or relapse 
triggers as possible. By keeping quiet about the way that exposure to alcohol at home 
is affecting him, Rick is being passive by not expressing his need for adjustments to 
Tanya. There could be a couple of reasons for this:
•	 Rick may not like the idea of “burdening” his girlfriend or anyone else with 
his recovery.
•	 Rick may worry that Tanya won’t want to be with him if it means limiting 
her use of alcohol or making adjustments to her lifestyle.
•	 Rick feels that he should be “strong enough” to have alcohol around him 
without relapsing.
Do any of these ideas sound familiar? These types of thoughts are often the 
reasons why people in recovery don’t express their needs openly. At the root of the 
thoughts is the belief that they will be rejected in some way if they ask too much of 
others, or the belief that they should be “stronger” than the addiction (and therefore 
should not have any needs from other people related to their addiction recovery). 
These are what we call recovery-­interfering thoughts, ones that stand in the way of your 
success in recovery. So, how do you overcome these ways of thinking? Well, first, you 
have to recognize them when they occur. Then, you can try having a healthier inner 
dialogue to cope with these thoughts and try to change them. Coming back to Rick’s 
situation, here are some healthy ways he can talk himself through the recovery-­
interfering thoughts that prevent him from asking Tanya for her help (by making 
some adjustments, such as removing alcohol from the house):
•	 Recovery-­interfering thought: I don’t want to burden my girlfriend with my 
recovery.
Assertive, recovery mindset: Although it might be burdensome to her to 
make some changes, the effect that Rick’s addiction has had on his rela­
tionship has been way more burdensome, and could create more serious 
problems. If she cares about him, she will make whatever adjustments are 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
72
needed to help him. And she won’t necessarily feel burdened; maybe she 
has been waiting for Rick to come up with one or more ways that she can 
help him. You never know how another person feels until you sit down and 
have a conversation about it.
•	 Recovery-­interfering thought: She might not want to be with me if she has to 
make adjustments to her lifestyle.
Assertive, recovery mindset: Hopefully Tanya will not feel turned off by 
the idea of making some changes to her lifestyle in support of Rick’s 
recovery—­such as not keeping alcohol in the house for the time being, and 
hosting alcohol-­free dinners, or hosting dinners at a restaurant. But if she 
does object, then she may need to become more knowledgeable about addic­
tion. If she doesn’t know much about it, she may find it difficult to under­
stand why Rick can’t just control himself when there is alcohol at home. To 
educate herself, she can go with him to counseling, or attend an Al-­Anon 
meeting. Regardless, for their relationship to be successful, Tanya will need 
to deepen her understanding of Rick’s addiction, and figure out whether 
and how she might be willing to support his recovery.
•	 Recovery-­interfering thought: I should be strong enough to be around alcohol 
without relapsing.
Assertive, recovery mindset: Remember, “Be smart, not strong!” Even if 
Rick thinks that he should be strong enough to exercise willpower and resist 
drinking when there is alcohol in his home, the reality is, he isn’t. He has 
an addiction and he’s in early recovery. The way to preserve his recovery is 
to be smart and remove all triggers from his environment, rather than 
trying to prove that he can handle being around alcohol. Accepting that 
reality is a big part of recovery.
Now that you know how to talk yourself through some of the thoughts that can 
interfere with being assertive, you’ll need some practice in the delivery of assertive 
communication. Here are some rules of thumb:
Listen Carefully
When you show others that you are listening to them, it helps strengthen the con­
nection between you, so that both you and the person you are talking to can be open 

Step 2: Set Yourself Up to Succeed
73
about your feelings, including your wants and needs. There are both verbal and non­
verbal ways of showing someone that you are listening. Here are some examples of 
verbal listening skills:
•	 Asking questions to clarify your understanding of what the other person is 
saying (such as asking “Why?” or “How?” or “Can you say a little more 
about what you mean by that?”)
•	 Summarizing (or paraphrasing) your understanding of what the person has 
said to you (for example, “If I heard you right, then you feel like…”)
•	 Using “I” statements when you eventually respond, so that you come across 
as owning your feelings and avoid blaming or making false assumptions 
about the other person. (For example, rather than saying something like, 
“Your anger triggers me to want to use,” you could say, “Sometimes I feel 
like you’re angry with me. And I don’t cope with that very well. When I 
feel you’re angry with me, I get the urge to use.” Notice how much “I” is 
used in the assertive statement; that is much less likely to put the other 
person on the defense.)
Nonverbal skills are also important tools to show another person that you are 
listening. A few ways that you can show someone you are listening through your body 
language are:
•	 Making eye contact
•	 Using facial movement and expressions to show your interest—­such as 
nodding and smiling when the other person is talking
•	 Leaning toward the other person, or positioning yourself in a way that 
shows you’re tuning in
•	 Keeping distractions (such as your cell phone) out of reach during your 
conversation
Ask for What You Need
Once you’ve shown the other person you’re talking to that you are tuned in and 
listening, if there is something that you feel that you need, you can request it in a 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
74
respectful way. One way to do this is to express your feelings as they relate to what 
you’re asking for. The phrase would look like this:
I feel  	 	
	
	
	
	
  when  
 ,  and 
I need  
 .
Putting it all together, let’s come back to Rick’s situation. Using the way of phras­
ing his request suggested above, his assertive conversation with Tanya might go some­
thing like this: “I’ve been doing a lot of work on my recovery, and I’m learning about 
some of the things that I need to be successful. You’ve been very supportive of my 
recovery, and because I trust you and I know your intentions for me are good, I need 
to tell you something that isn’t so easy for me to admit. I feel very vulnerable when I 
am around alcohol. I’ve noticed that having it around the house and having people 
drinking at dinner parties here is hard for me. I get strong cravings to drink. I am 
worried that I am going to relapse, and I need your help and support. Would you be 
willing to consider not keeping alcohol at home for the time being?”
In this example, Rick used a lot of the key skills involved in assertive 
communication:
•	 He started the discussion by saying something positive to Tanya about 
what he appreciates about her (“You’ve been very supportive…”).
•	 He made several “I” statements, underlined above, about his feelings of 
vulnerability to relapse around alcohol (without accusing Tanya and her 
use of alcohol of being the reason that he is triggered).
•	 He expressed his own concerns also underlined, about the effect that having 
alcohol in the house could have on his recovery.
•	 He made a direct request for Tanya’s help and support (“and I need your 
help and support. Would you be willing…”).
Most importantly, he did all of this in a very polite and respectful manner.
In your own recovery, there may be ways you need to set limits with others that 
are completely different from Rick’s situation. Some of the ways that you might use 
the assertiveness skills you are learning include:
•	 Asking people close to you who have been affected by your addiction not to 
repeatedly bring up the ways that they’ve been hurt or upset by your addic­
tive behaviors

Step 2: Set Yourself Up to Succeed
75
•	 Asking your loved ones to be patient with you during your recovery if you 
are emotionally up and down or if you need some time to yourself
•	 Explaining how certain behaviors of others (such as arguing, criticizing, or 
bringing up the past) may be triggering for you and asking that your partner, 
family, or loved ones try to minimize them
•	 Asking a loved one to come to counseling with you to better understand 
how to support your recovery
Exercise 4.5: Practice Assertive Communication
To get some practice with assertive communication, in this exercise you will think about a 
few people in your life with whom you might need to set some limits or make some requests 
related to your recovery. For each of these people, you will practice writing out how you 
would express your needs using assertive communication.
Person 1:  
What I need from this person:  
Here’s how I’ll say it assertively:
I feel  	 	
	
	
	
	
  when  

.
I need  

. 
Person 2:  
What I need from this person:  

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
76
Here’s how I’ll say it assertively:
I feel  	 	
	
	
	
	
  when  

.
I need  

. 
Saying No to Offers of Alcohol or Drugs
Social pressure to drink or use causes one in three people in recovery to slip (Epstein 
and McCrady 2009). There are various reasons why it might be challenging for you 
to turn down these offers: It might be because the urge to use once it’s available is so 
strong, it is hard for you to overcome it. Another reason is that you may not be good 
at saying no to someone who is pushy. (And some people are alcohol or drug “pushers.”) 
You might also worry about what judgments other people might make about you if 
you say no.
The most important thing to remember in all of these situations is that your 
recovery is your priority, and the temptation to drink or use to please others is some­
thing you’ll need to overcome promptly if you’re going to stay sober. Drink or drug 
“pushers” need to be addressed respectfully but firmly so that they don’t continue to 
offer and trigger you. Here’s how to say no, whether to a pusher or to a friendly offer 
of alcohol or drugs:
•	 The first thing to say in response to an offer is “no” or “no thank you” in a 
serious tone, so that you come across as direct and clear and not “wishy 
washy” about your decision.
•	 Make eye contact when you say no; otherwise you might appear uncertain 
of your answer, leaving the door open for the other person to convince you 
to change your mind.

Step 2: Set Yourself Up to Succeed
77
•	 Ask for something else instead: “No, thank you. Do you have sparkling 
water? That would be great.” Or if someone is offering an activity involving 
drug use, you can suggest something else that is not so risky. For example, 
if a friend suggests that you go to his house and smoke some weed, you 
could say, “No, thanks. I’m hungry, though. Do you want to go out and get 
something to eat?”
•	 Try changing the subject.
•	 Ask the person not to offer you alcohol or drugs anymore. Say, “I stopped 
drinking,” or “I’ve stopped using,” and assertively ask the person not to 
offer any to you. Remember that anyone who continues to offer is not being 
respectful to you, and you might not want to spend a lot of time around 
that person.
•	 Have a dialogue with yourself about it. Remind yourself why your recovery 
is so important. You shouldn’t feel guilty about letting others down by not 
joining them in drinking or using. That’s a choice they are making for 
themselves. But you are choosing to build a healthy life for yourself, and 
you deserve that. Part of recovery is learning to be self-­protective.
If you have a friend, sponsor, counselor, or loved one who would be willing, try 
pairing up and practicing what you will say when you are offered alcohol or drugs. It’s 
only a matter of time before that happens, and the more prepared you are, the better 
you will handle it.
Expanding Your Social Network
In this section, we will focus on ways of building up your network of support so that 
you have at least a handful of Safety Nets you can count on to help you through a 
tough moment, day, or period during your recovery.
First, remember that there are a lot of different types of relationships that can be 
Safety Nets for you. Your family members—­including children, parents, and other 
relatives—­can be Safety Nets. Members of a self-­help group or other community-­
based organization (such as a church or temple), professional counselors, friends, or a 
romantic partner are other possible Safety Nets. The first thing to pay attention to as 
you identify who, for you, is a Safety Net, is the role of alcohol and drugs in that 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
78
person’s life. Is this someone who drinks or uses drugs heavily, or who is likely to 
drink or use when around you? Is it someone who would be willing to abstain from 
drinking or using when around you? Ideally, your Safety Nets should be people who 
either don’t drink or use (or do so very little), or who are willing to abstain around 
you.
The next step is for you to think about the qualities that you are looking for in 
the people who could be Safety Nets in your life. Use the exercise below to help you 
identify these qualities.
Exercise 4.6: Qualities of Safety Nets
People who can be Safety Nets for me will have the following qualities (check all that apply 
for you):
      	
Not actively drinking or using
      	
Good at listening
      	
Knowledgeable about addiction (or willing to learn)
      	
Respectful toward me
      	
Nonjudgmental
      	
Trustworthy
      	
Kind
      	
Nurturing
      	
Patient
      	
Willing to make time for me
      	
Not flaky
      	
Genuine
      	
Interested in sharing thoughts, perspectives, and ideas
      	
Protective of me and my recovery

Step 2: Set Yourself Up to Succeed
79
Other important qualities of a Safety Net in my life:




If you don’t currently have any Safety Nets in your life, or if you have just a few 
and would like to have more, make it a priority to expand your support network. 
Having many people to call on for support when you need it is invaluable in any stage 
of recovery.
Exercise 4.7: Ways to Expand Your Network
In this exercise, you will list new ways that you plan to try to expand your social support 
network.
List at least two ways you can reach out to old friends or potential new ones, such as 
joining a volunteer organization, enrolling in a class, or contacting one or more old friends 
who are potential Safety Nets:






The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
80
List at least two ways you can become part of a community-­based organization, such 
as joining a mutual self-­help group like Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or Narcotics Anonymous 
(NA); attending a religious activity at a temple, church, or other entity; joining a special-­
interest group or club; or seeking a professional counselor or other treatment provider:





List at least one way that you can deepen your relationship with one or more of 
your family members (a partner, children, or other relatives), such as calling or getting 
together more often:






Step 2: Set Yourself Up to Succeed
81
A Word on Mutual Self-­Help Programs
Mutual self-­help groups are the most widely available and helpful resources that 
you can use to build a social support network for your recovery. More and more 
studies show that participating in self-­help groups enhances social support for recov­
ery, and as a result, contributes in a very meaningful way to success in achieving and 
maintaining sobriety (Kelly et al. 2012). There are various self-­help groups that use 
the 12-­step recovery model, including Alcoholics Anonymous, Narcotics Anonymous, 
Marijuana Anonymous, and Dual Recovery Anonymous (for people with both addic­
tions and mental health problems), to name just a few. Other self-­help groups include 
Self-­Management and Recovery Training (SMART Recovery), an alternative that 
may be a good fit for people who are uncomfortable with the spiritual component of 
12-­step groups.
It might help to keep the following information and advice in mind as you explore 
self-­help groups:
•	 Some people like AA and other 12-­step groups and others don’t. It is not 
for everybody, but for those who get something out of it, there is potential 
for great benefits.
•	 You don’t have to agree with everything you hear in a 12-­step group for it 
to be helpful. Remember, it is the social support that is at the core of the 
therapeutic benefit, so even if the twelve steps themselves are not all helpful 
to you, getting connected with other people in recovery is likely to be 
therapeutic in itself.
•	 Try going to lots of different meetings. Most people need to attend several 
different meetings before they find the one that feels like a good fit. There 
are different formats to explore. (For example, there are speaker meetings, 
in which individuals talk about their experience to the group of attendees, 
and there are step study meetings, in which one of the twelve steps is dis­
cussed in depth, and the group will be involved in discussion.)
•	 Get involved beyond just attending, if you can. Plan to get a sponsor, or 
volunteer to take a “commitment” at a meeting (like setting up chairs or 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
82
coffee). Studies show that people who get more involved in these ways get 
more long-­term benefits and have more success in staying sober (Timko 
2006).
•	 If you don’t like the spiritual part of the 12-­step meetings, try going to a 
SMART Recovery meeting, which is more CBT-­based.
Wrap-­up
Congratulations on working your way through an intense chapter with lots of new 
concepts and skills to work on! As you’re learning, there are a lot of different ways 
that you can lay the groundwork for a recovery-­oriented life. It starts with making 
your environment safe and free from triggers. Then, you have to start thinking with 
your recovery mindset about your day-­to-­day decisions, to be sure that you are not 
setting yourself up for a relapse without realizing it. Next thing you know, you’re 
rethinking your relationships to figure out who’s good for your recovery and who is 
not so good, and you’re adjusting your communication style with the not-­so-­good 
ones. Then you’re looking to make new friends, join new organizations, and go to 
self-­help meetings. And don’t forget to exercise!
If all of this is a little overwhelming, that is completely understandable. But 
remember, you don’t have to make all of these changes at once. Pace yourself with 
each of these skills and the exercises that go along with them in a way that’s comfort­
able for you. Once you’ve put them into practice, you can move on to the next chapter, 
where you’ll learn to be a “self expert,” so that you can begin to understand how your 
personal ways of thinking can set you up for a relapse, and learn how to change them.

CHAPTER 5
Step 3: Become a 
“Self Expert”
N
ow that you have done the hard work of taking an honest look at the prob­
lems that your drug or alcohol use has caused, strengthening your motiva­
tion to change, and creating your change plan, it is important for you to 
learn to truly know your addicted self. What does that mean? you might ask. Think 
back to when we talked about your “addicted brain” and how it drives you to act in 
destructive ways that support your addiction. Step 3 is the first major step you will 
take to strengthen your “rational brain” and put it into the driver’s seat.
To do this, you need to know your addicted self inside and out. That means 
knowing exactly how, when, and why your addicted brain is most likely to get trig­
gered and start competing with your rational, recovering brain for control. Once you 
have that figured out, you will be a “self expert.” In this chapter, you will begin to 
learn how to use cognitive and behavioral therapy skills to understand your own 
unique patterns of thinking and feeling as they relate to your addiction.
The purpose of this chapter is to teach you three strategies that can help you to 
identify the situations and ways of thinking that fuel your addictive behavior: (1) 
identifying your unique triggers for alcohol or drug use, (2) recognizing distorted 
thinking, and (3) using self-­monitoring skills. The more frequently you are able to 
recognize and anticipate when your addicted brain is taking hold and causing you to 
think and act in irrational, self-­destructive ways, the better you will get at intention­
ally using your rational brain to make healthier choices for yourself. Each time your 
rational brain wins control over your behavior, your recovery gets a little bit stronger 
and your addicted brain loses a little bit of power over your behavior. In the long 
term, your rational brain can take over completely, so that making healthy choices is 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
84
no longer a fight; it is a way of life. In this chapter, and the next, you will learn how 
to use cognitive and behavioral therapy skills to become a “self expert” and reclaim 
that control.
Becoming a “self expert” is a process of understanding how your addiction con­
trols you, so that, with time and practice, you can turn the tables on it. That means 
getting a handle on the wide range of situations, places, people, and experiences that 
activate your addicted brain. These are called triggers. Typically, when you encounter 
a trigger, this causes a sequence of experiences that leads to drug or alcohol use when 
your addicted brain is in control. Here’s how it unfolds:
TRIGGER  THOUGHT  CRAVING  DRUG OR ALCOHOL USE
Does this sequence look familiar? If it does, that’s great! If it doesn’t, that is per­
fectly okay; for many people with addictions, this process happens so quickly that it 
takes time and practice just to notice it. This practice is a very important part of the 
cognitive behavioral approach. As you progress through the exercises in this chapter, 
you will learn to notice when you are triggered, and what exactly that feels like for 
you. For instance, when you are triggered, you may or may not be aware of the 
thoughts that are going through your head. You may or may not have noticed exactly 
what the trigger was. Maybe you are simply aware of an urge or craving to drink or 
use drugs, and if so, that is a great start.
As you will learn, there are many components of cravings and people experience 
them differently. Some people feel cravings physically in their bodies, while for others 
the craving is more of a thought process, like I need it or I can’t handle these feelings 
without it. When you learn to self-­monitor, you will be able to look at the diagram 
above and know exactly what happened during the sequence of TRIGGER  
THOUGHT  CRAVING—­physically, emotionally, and cognitively (which refers to 
the thoughts you were having). Once you are aware of what happened, you can begin 
an inner dialogue with yourself about it, and you can use this inner dialogue to cope 
with the thoughts, feelings, and cravings without drinking or using drugs.
Another key component of becoming a “self expert” is developing an awareness of 
the kinds of things your addicted brain will tell you to get you to drink or use drugs. 
In CBT, these distorted or irrational thoughts are called red flag thoughts. In this 
chapter, you will learn about some red flag thoughts that a lot of people with addic­
tions experience when they are feeling triggered. In reviewing these thoughts, you 
can identify the ones that you’ve had, or even come up with your own. This will 
prepare you for the next chapter, where you will learn how to “talk back” to the 
thoughts using your rational, recovering brain.

Step 3: Become a “Self Expert”
85
Triggers and Urges
At one time or another, most everyone in recovery experiences urges to drink or use 
drugs. In fact, cravings are one of the symptoms that define the disease of addiction 
(American Psychiatric Association 2013). That’s no surprise, of course; there are both 
biological and psychological explanations for why you would feel a desire to drink or 
use drugs after your last drink or dose has left your body. Physically, when you are 
addicted to something, your body becomes dependent on having a steady, consistent 
dose of it in your system. When that steady dose is diminished, or taken away 
abruptly, your addicted brain will communicate urges to you to get you to replenish 
it. This is because, as your body is adjusting to receiving less of the substance, you 
can experience uncomfortable physical and mental withdrawal symptoms. The con­
ditioned, addicted part of your brain will tell you that you need to drink or use to get 
back to feeling normal. That’s the cycle of withdrawal.
The psychological urge or craving can feel just as potent—­and sometimes even 
stronger. You may recall that in chapter 2, you learned about how your use of alcohol 
or drugs can become a conditioned, automatic response to certain cues, much like a 
habit. When drinking or using drugs becomes associated, or “linked,” with certain 
situations, emotions, people, or things, then those become triggers. Because that psy­
chological link between triggers and using substances can be very powerful, being in 
the presence of these triggers can become quite uncomfortable without alcohol or 
drugs. You’ll experience this discomfort as a craving.
Studies have shown that triggers fall into several categories (Marlatt and Gordon 
1985; Larimer, Palmer, and Marlatt 1999). As you become a self expert, think about 
which of these categories apply to you, so that you can learn to become more self-­
aware when you enter triggering situations:
•	 Negative emotional states: Some people drink or use drugs as a way of 
“self-­medicating” uncomfortable emotions such as anxiety, sadness, 
boredom, loneliness, or anger.
•	 Interpersonal conflict: Have you ever used alcohol or drugs to cope with 
a relationship problem? This is another category of triggers—­some people 
drink or use when they have a fight with a partner or a family member. 
Others get triggered by rejection or criticism at work, school, or home. 
Often it is the combination of a conflict and your emotional reaction to it 
that places you at risk for a relapse. In other words, it’s not just the fight 
with your partner; it’s also the emotion (for example, anger) that it 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
86
generates that then leads you to drink or use drugs to cope. In fact, in one 
of the largest studies of the reasons people with addictions relapse (Marlatt 
1996), more than 50 percent of the relapses were triggered by negative 
emotional states stemming from interpersonal conflict. If interpersonal 
problems are a trigger for you, then finding a healthier place to put the 
anger or other negative emotions that arise is going to be an important part 
of your recovery.
•	 Social pressure: Do you feel like you just can’t resist drinking or using 
when you are in a social situation where other people are indulging? If so, 
you are not alone. For some people, these are the most challenging situa­
tions when trying to abstain from alcohol or drug use. To overcome this 
challenge, you first need to understand why this situation is difficult for 
you. For some people, it is hard to refuse an offer of alcohol or drugs simply 
because it is so tempting. For others, self-­consciousness can take over, 
leading them to feel worried about how others will think about them or 
judge them if they make different choices. This is a very natural tendency 
but it is an important one to work through in your recovery. Social pres­
sures to use substances can be direct (for example, someone offering you a 
drink or drugs), or indirect (as in being around people who you know have 
drugs or who are drinking or using in front of you). You will learn how to 
respond to these kinds of social pressures in the next chapter.
•	 Positive emotions: For some people, drinking and drug use is all about 
amplifying the good feelings, rather than escaping from or avoiding an 
uncomfortable feeling. Maybe you get triggered when you’re at a celebra­
tion, or when you are in a very good mood. Or maybe when something 
reminds you of the positive emotions or sensations that drinking or using 
can bring on for you, you experience a desire to feel those things (like relax­
ation, elation, confidence, or an energy boost). If this is you, then one of 
your goals will be to find other sources of positive emotions and rewarding 
experiences or activities that are compatible with your recovery. Another 
important goal will be to learn to think more carefully about the full range 
of effects that you can expect drinking or using drugs to have on you. If 
you think it all the way through, you’ll find that the positive sensations are 
only part of the story. You will practice thinking it all the way through in 
the next chapter.

Step 3: Become a “Self Expert”
87
Exercise 5.1: Identifying Triggers
Below you will find a list of triggers that can initiate the sequence of thoughts, cravings, and 
behaviors (like drinking or using drugs) that we have been reviewing. Place a check mark 
beside the triggers that you have experienced, and place a star next to the ones that you feel 
come up repeatedly for you. You’ll notice that we’ve separated internal from external triggers, 
so that you can start to learn to distinguish between them. Remember that internal triggers 
are just what they sound like; they are emotions inside of you. External triggers, on the other 
hand, are cues that are external to you—­such as places, people, or situations that you have 
come to associate with drinking or using.
Internal Triggers
      	
Depression
      	
Loneliness
      	
Happiness
      	
Excitement
      	
Feeling stressed
      	
Feeling irritable
      	
Feeling overwhelmed
      	
Feeling jealous
      	
Anxiety
      	
Boredom
      	
Anger
      	
Feeling rejected
      	
Frustration
      	
Guilt or shame
      	
Needing an energy boost
      	
Withdrawal symptoms

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
88
Other internal triggers: 




External Triggers
In this exercise, we focus on four types of external triggers: people, places, situations or activi­
ties, and things. Under each category, place a check mark beside the triggers that apply to 
you, and place a star next to those that come up repeatedly for you.
People
      	
Friends
      	
Spouse or significant other
      	
Family members
      	
Coworkers or bosses
List of people who trigger me: 





Step 3: Become a “Self Expert”
89
Places
      	
Bars or clubs
      	
Friends’ houses (name those friends here):




      	
Concerts
      	
School or work
      	
Neighborhoods or freeway exits
Other places that are triggers for me: 




Situations or Activities
      	
Parties (or other gatherings at which you meet new people)
      	
Holidays or other special occasions
      	
When home alone

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
90
      	
When dining out
      	
Before or during a date
      	
Waking up in the morning
      	
After work or school
Other situations or activities that are triggers for me: 




Things
      	
Stashes of alcohol or drugs in the house
      	
Paraphernalia associated with drinking or using (favorite shot glasses or wine 
glasses, bongs, rolling paper, pipes, or other objects used as part of rituals 
when getting high)
Other things that are triggers for me: 





Step 3: Become a “Self Expert”
91
The Role of Thoughts in Relapse
Now that you have learned what your triggers are, you are ready for the next step: 
uncovering the thoughts that lead you to drink or use. Remember, the usual sequence 
that can end in a relapse is: TRIGGER  THOUGHT  CRAVING  DRUG 
OR ALCOHOL USE. In the exercises that follow, you will start connecting your per­
sonal triggers with specific thoughts.
In everyday life, our thoughts are directly connected to our emotions and our 
actions. We all have some thoughts that are rational and some that are irrational. As 
someone with an addiction, your irrational thoughts around drinking or using mostly 
come from your addicted brain. Thoughts are very important to notice and under­
stand, because when we encounter a trigger—­or any stressful or unexpected situation—­
the way we think about it dictates the way that we cope with it (Marlatt and Gordon 
1985). Let’s look at an example.
Scott Gets Triggered
Scott is a software engineer with alcoholism. He has been abstinent from alcohol for 
two months and is doing well in his recovery. One day, he goes to work and his boss 
asks to meet with him. Scott’s boss says that one of the clients he has been working 
with is complaining that he has been too slow to resolve problems with his new 
software, and that he was not very polite in his email when this issue was raised. 
Scott’s boss is writing him up, and warns him that he needs to improve his 
efficiency and customer service to meet performance standards.
So, there it is: a triggering interpersonal situation. Scott feels devalued by his boss, 
leading him to feel inadequate both personally and professionally. Ideally, Scott 
would respond to this with some positive coping skills, like finding a healthy outlet 
for the emotions that this feedback from his boss brought on. He might try to resolve 
things with the client who is upset, and find a way to communicate with his boss 
constructively to improve his standing at work. But Scott’s ability to take these 
actions depends on the way that he is thinking about the situation, and himself. Let’s 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
92
take a look at some of the thoughts that go through Scott’s head after his talk with 
his boss.
•	 He is picking on me. This just isn’t fair!
•	 I didn’t do anything wrong with that client. I wish I didn’t have to deal with him.
•	 Nothing I do is ever good enough.
•	 I never succeed at anything. I knew it was just a matter of time before I’d get fired 
from this place.
•	 My boss probably just doesn’t like me. Nobody likes me.
•	 If I could just have one drink, it would calm me down.
Scott is stuck in a cycle of negative and irrational thinking. You might notice as 
you look at each of his thoughts that he is not stepping back from the situation to try 
and evaluate whether there is anything constructive about the feedback his boss gave 
him, or whether there is a way to get some resolution to the problem. Instead, his 
irrational thoughts take hold; he is quick to interpret many aspects of the situation 
as reflections of his own personal inadequacy. It’s as though he is overly sensitive to 
any aspects of the situation that could reflect rejection and negativity. Looking at life 
from this irrational perspective, it is not surprising that he feels like a failure—­an 
unlikable and unsuccessful person—­and that he predicts that he will be fired.
Scott is not alone; a lot of people (both addicts and non-­addicts) can get easily 
swept into this irrational way of interpreting and reacting to an upsetting experience. 
The key is to recognize what is happening and prevent yourself from “falling for it.” 
It is, after all, irrational! If you fall for it, your actions will be irrational too. If you 
catch those thoughts when they happen, you can switch gears, engage your rational 
brain, and use some positive coping strategies that will lead you away from a relapse. 
Let’s break it down further so that you can figure out your own patterns of distorted 
thinking.
Distorted Thoughts—­Learn to Catch Them!
There are certain types of distorted or irrational thoughts that make you more vul­
nerable to relapse. Like Scott’s distorted thoughts, some are directly related to 

Step 3: Become a “Self Expert”
93
drinking or using, while others are not. It’s important for you to know that even the 
thoughts that are not directly related to drinking or using can lead you to a relapse. 
In Scott’s situation, some of the negative, irrational thoughts he has about himself 
(such as Nobody likes me) trigger negative emotions, which he experiences as feelings 
of worthlessness. These negative emotions lead him to have thoughts about 
drinking.
Have you ever had thoughts about drinking or using after something upsetting 
happened to you? If so, it was not just the upsetting event or situation that created 
the desire to drink or use; it was the thoughts and emotions that you experienced 
during or after the event. Picture the most recent upsetting event that got you think­
ing about drinking or using. Can you pinpoint the thoughts you had in that situation, 
just before you started thinking about drinking or using? If so, that is terrific! If not, 
don’t worry, you’ll get plenty of practice with this.
For some, the hardest part of overcoming irrational thinking is recognizing when 
it is happening. That is because most of our irrational thought patterns have repeated 
themselves so often over time that they have become automatic. When our thoughts 
are automatic, we tend not to notice them. As a “self expert in training,” you are 
going to learn to “catch” your thoughts as they happen. Let’s take a look at some of 
the most common types of irrational thoughts so that you can start to identify the 
ones that you’ll need to work on.
Red Flag Thoughts
Because they are directly related to drinking or using, red flag thoughts may be 
easier for you to “catch” than other thoughts that can lead you to relapse. A red flag 
thought is something that you tell yourself about drinking or using that increases the 
likelihood that you will relapse. In CBT, sometimes these are referred to as “relapse 
justifying” thoughts or a process of “relapse justification.” In the example above, 
Scott’s red flag thought is, If I could just have one drink, it would calm me down. These 
types of thoughts, that “make it okay” for you to drink or use when you are in recov­
ery, are coming from your addicted brain. When you find yourself having these 
thoughts that give you “permission” to drink or use, that’s when you have to work 
harder to kick your rational brain into gear and use your new coping skills, which you 
will learn in steps 4 through 7. Your job right now is just to notice the thoughts as 
they happen.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
94
Exercise 5.2: Identifying Red Flag Thoughts
The following is a list of some common red flag thoughts (Brown et al. 2006). Check all that 
you’ve had at one time or another and add any that you don’t see listed.
      	
I have to… (I have to have a drink.)
      	
Nobody has to know.
      	
It really doesn’t matter if… (It really doesn’t matter if I use.)
      	
I can control it.
      	
I’m only going to have one.
      	
I’m having a bad day; I might as well use.
      	
I deserve to… (I deserve to have a drink.)
      	
It’s a special occasion! I can always start over tomorrow.
Other red flag thoughts I’ve had: 



Mistakes in Thinking
Now that you have a better handle on your red flag thoughts, it’s time to take a 
look at other common mistakes in thinking. Take a look at the six common types of 
irrational thoughts that follow, noticing the ones that you relate to the most. Keep in 
mind that not everyone experiences every type of irrational thought; if you notice 
that there are some types of irrational thoughts you are unfamiliar with, then you 
don’t need to come up with a personal example for those.

Step 3: Become a “Self Expert”
95
BLACK-­OR-­WHITE THINKING
When you see things in black and white, it means that they are either completely 
good or completely bad. Scott was caught up in a lot of black-­or-­white thinking just 
before he started entertaining the idea of drinking. When his boss gave him critical 
feedback, he started to view himself as completely worthless on the job and a failure—­
with thoughts such as Nothing I do is ever good enough, and I never succeed at anything. 
When your thoughts contain words like nothing and never, then you’re definitely in the 
thick of some black-­or-­white thinking. If you’re a perfectionist type, you’re more vul­
nerable to this; like Scott, making a mistake causes you to view everything you’ve 
done as useless. Let’s look at an example of how black-­or-­white thinking can lead to 
a red flag thought.
Black-­or-­White Thought
Red Flag Thought
I messed up everything at work.
I might as well go and drink.
Now, try writing down one or more examples of your black-­or-­white thoughts and 
the red flag thoughts they can lead to. 
Examples of black-or-while thoughts I’ve had: 


Red flag thought: 



The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
96
DISCOUNTING THE POSITIVE
Picture yourself wearing a pair of glasses with a screen in place of the lens. You 
filter your interpretations of experiences, situations, and the ways that people interact 
with you through this screen. The screen keeps all of the positive thoughts about 
your experiences on the outside, letting only the negative thoughts come through. 
This is the case even when good things happen. For example, if Scott’s boss gives him 
a compliment on something he did well at work, and he’s “discounting the positive,” 
he might have a thought like, He didn’t mean that. He just feels sorry for me because I keep 
on screwing up. He said that out of pity. By discounting the positive, Scott is casting aside 
all of the ways that this compliment might be reassuring. Below is an example of how 
discounting the positive can lead to a red flag thought.
Discounting the Positive
Red Flag Thought
My boss only said something nice to me out 
of pity.
I’m pathetic. I have nothing to lose by 
drinking.
Now, try writing down one or more examples of thoughts you’ve had that dis­
count the positive. Then, write down the red flag thoughts they can lead to.
Thoughts that discount the positive: 


Red flag thoughts: 



Step 3: Become a “Self Expert”
97
JUMPING TO CONCLUSIONS
If you tend to jump to conclusions, you are doing one of two things: You are either 
mind reading or fortune telling. If you are a mind reader, then you assume that other 
people’s behavior toward you reflects something negative about how they feel about 
you. You make these interpretations with very little or no factual information. For 
example, if you are with a friend who is not being especially talkative, rather than 
assuming that your friend might be having a bad day, or might have something on her 
mind, you think, She’s not talking to me because she doesn’t like me. That is one form of 
jumping to conclusions.
If you fall into a habit of fortune telling, then you predict that things will turn out 
badly for you. The way you see things, there is doom and gloom waiting for you 
around the corner; that is your ultimate fate. Scott did some fortune telling after his 
boss gave him the negative feedback; he predicted that he would get fired, even 
though his boss did not say that he was on the road to losing his job. Although getting 
written up at work obviously isn’t a positive, it is also not a sure path to getting fired. 
When you are fortune telling, you go straight to the worst-­case scenario without con­
sidering the other possible outcomes.
Let’s look at a couple of examples of how jumping to conclusions can bring on red 
flag thoughts. You’ll notice that in the first example below, the red flag thought is one 
that is triggered by interpersonal conflict; sometimes you may feel like retaliating 
against someone who has upset you, by drinking or using. Make a mental note of it 
or write down an example in the exercise below if this is a pattern of thinking you 
have experienced before. In steps 4 through 7, you will learn how to cope with inter­
personal conflict in a healthier way.
Jumping to Conclusions
Red Flag Thought
My brother is blowing me off because he 
thinks he’s better than me. (Mind reading)
I’ll show him! If he’s going to treat me like 
that, I’m going to go use.
With my luck, treatment won’t work for me. 
(Fortune telling)
I’ll never be able to stay clean and sober. 
There’s no point in even trying.
Now, try writing down one or more examples of ways that you have engaged in 
jumping to conclusions, and the red flag thoughts that are connected.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
98
My ways of jumping to conclusions (mind reading or fortune telling): 


Red flag thoughts: 


TAKING YOUR FEELINGS TOO SERIOUSLY
When you take your feelings too seriously, it means that you think of your feel­
ings as reality. Even though your feelings are real, they can lead you to some unreal­
istic conclusions if you take them too seriously. For example, if you feel depressed you 
may draw the conclusion that you can’t enjoy anything. Although your depressed 
feeling is real, if you were to get out and try to do something enjoyable, chances are 
it would help you get out of that mood.
Here’s another example: Scott felt worthless at work after his boss spoke with him 
about his need for improvement. Just because he felt worthless, it doesn’t mean that 
he is worthless. It is hard to separate an intense feeling from reality during the 
moment, but the fact is that just because you feel a certain way, it doesn’t mean that 
you are that way. Let’s look at an example of how taking your feelings too seriously 
can lead to a red flag thought.
Taking Your Feelings Too Seriously
Red Flag Thought
I feel hopeless; therefore, life must be hopeless 
for me.
Things will never get better. At least if I go 
use I won’t have to feel the pain of my 
hopeless life.

Step 3: Become a “Self Expert”
99
Now, try writing down one or more examples of your experience with taking your 
feelings too seriously, and the red flag thoughts that this can lead to.
Examples of my thoughts when I’ve taken my feelings too seriously: 


Red flag thoughts: 


SELF-­BLAME
If you tend to be hard on yourself, and have an active self-­critical voice inside of 
you, then you probably can relate to this mistake in thinking. You blame yourself for 
things that may not be in your control. Your addiction is a perfect example. Do you 
ever blame yourself for it? Remember, even if you have made bad choices during your 
fight with addiction, becoming an addict was not your choice; nor was it your fault. 
You developed a brain disease, and you are working very hard to overcome it and put 
your rational mind back in control. Let’s look at an example of how self-­blame can 
lead to a red flag thought.
Self-­Blaming Thought
Red Flag Thought
It’s all my fault that I drink too much. 
I’ve ruined my life; I have nothing to lose by 
continuing to drink. 
Now, try writing down one or more examples of your self-­blaming thinking and 
the red flag thoughts that it can lead to.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
100
Self-­blaming thoughts: 


Red flag thoughts: 


LABELING YOURSELF
Labeling yourself is a close relative to taking your feelings too seriously. I 
feel               ; therefore I must be               . You label yourself for the ways 
that you feel, or for the mistakes that you’ve made. For example, if you are feeling 
down, you might think, I’m a depressing person; I’m such a downer for everybody. Instead 
of thinking of yourself as a person who happens to be in a depressed mood, you label 
yourself for it. Another example: if you make a mistake, you might label yourself as a 
“loser,” rather than a person who happened to make a mistake. Let’s look at an 
example of how labeling can lead to a red flag thought.
Labeling Thought
Red Flag Thought
I relapsed, just like I knew I would. I’m just 
a raging addict, always will be.
Raging addicts like me never get clean in 
the long run. I’m going to be another bad 
statistic. There’s no point in me even trying 
to stay clean.
Now, try writing down one or more examples of your own experience with label­
ing and the red flag thoughts that it can lead to.

Step 3: Become a “Self Expert”
101
Labeling thoughts: 


Red flag thoughts: 


The Spiraling Lapse
If you’re like most people who struggle with addictions, then you’ve probably made 
more than one attempt to cut back or stop drinking or using. Think about the last 
time that you tried, unsuccessfully, to stop drinking or using. Did you know that the 
first time you drank or used after days, weeks, or months of abstinence was not a 
relapse? That very first time that you drink or use after a period of going without is 
called a slip or a lapse. What you probably don’t know is that, when you lapse, the way 
that you talk to yourself about it can determine whether or not you will continue 
drinking or using. When you keep the lapse going, it turns into a relapse.
Research has shown that it is very common to think about lapses in ways that 
keep you on the path to relapse, rather than recovery (Marlatt and Gordon 1985). 
Although it’s true that a lapse places you at risk for a relapse, the relapse is not inevi­
table. You have more control than you might think over the outcome. To prevent a 
lapse from converting into a full-­blown relapse, you need to avoid the mistake called 
the spiraling lapse. The spiraling lapse is when you interpret a lapse as being the result 
of one of two things:
1.	 You see yourself as a personal failure. People who interpret a lapse as a per­
sonal failure tend to feel very guilty or ashamed, and the desire to avoid or 
numb those feelings can very easily lead to more drinking or using.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
102
2.	 You view the lapse as being the result of things that are completely beyond 
your control. People who think of themselves as having no control over 
their addiction or their addictive behavior tend to give up on attempts to 
quit.
Here are some of the thoughts that you might have had if you’ve experienced the 
spiraling lapse:
•	 One lapse means I’m a total failure.
•	 I’ve blown everything now! I might as well keep drinking (or using).
•	 I am hopeless.
•	 Once a drunk (or addict), always a drunk (or addict).
•	 I’ll never get back to being straight again.
•	 I’ve screwed up today already, I might as well go all out!
•	 I have no willpower… I’ve lost all control.
•	 I’m just addicted to this stuff. I always will be.
Can you think of any other thoughts you’ve had that are along these lines? The 
thoughts you’ll want to identify are the ones that you tell yourself that make it more 
likely that you’ll continue to drink or use after you’ve lapsed. If you can think of any 
that are not listed above, write them in the space provided:





Step 3: Become a “Self Expert”
103
Obviously, it would be best if you would get it perfectly the first time around, and 
never slip or lapse. But research demonstrates that relapse rates for people with addic­
tions are similar to those for people with other chronic diseases, such as diabetes, 
hypertension, and asthma, occurring in 40 percent to 60 percent of those who receive 
treatment (McLellan 2000). What this really means is that a lapse or a relapse is not 
a sign that treatment has failed. In CBT, lapses or relapses are viewed as a sign that 
more treatment is needed, or that an adjustment to the treatment approach should be 
considered. Changes can include introducing different therapy techniques, introduc­
ing or adjusting a medication, or changing the therapy modality (such as shifting 
from weekly therapy to a more intensive type of program).
When it comes to the spiraling lapse, the adjustment you need may be as simple 
as changing your thinking about a lapse. Rather than interpreting it as a sign of 
failure, or the beginning of a downward spiral into relapse and loss of control, you can 
realize that, in the situation that triggered the lapse, you didn’t cope very well. If you 
think of it that way, you will see that the lapse is a learning opportunity. You don’t 
have to spiral into a full-­blown relapse; it is not inevitable. If you talk about it with 
your counselor or therapist, and complete the exercises you’ll find in the next chapter 
(“Step 4: Respond to Cognitive Distortions”), you can learn from your mistakes and 
find healthier ways to cope with similar triggering situations in the future.
Cravings
You are learning a lot about how the sequence from trigger to drug or alcohol use unfolds 
for you, now that you’ve come to understand your triggers and the thoughts they lead 
to. Next, we turn to the craving phase, which is the last experience in the sequence 
prior to making a decision about drinking or using. When you break the process 
down, and become aware of the triggers, thoughts, and cravings, then the final 
outcome of it (drinking or using—­or not) does not have to be automatic. It becomes a 
decision that you can make with your rational brain.
Noticing all of the sensations, thoughts, and emotions that you experience during 
cravings is a central part of becoming a self expert. Cravings are different for every­
one. The first step to beating a craving is taking a look at each of the features of the 
craving and understanding how you experience it. In this next exercise, you will iden­
tify how you experience cravings in your mind and body.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
104
Exercise 5.3: How Do You Experience Cravings?
Think about the last time you had an intense craving. Now, for this first part of the exercise, 
try and think about where you were feeling it in your body. Put a check next to the areas or 
sensations below that best describe your experience.
      	
Chest (tightness or other sensation)
      	
Stomach
      	
Jaw
      	
Neck
      	
Shoulders
      	
Heart (racing)
      	
Nose (feeling like you could smell what you were craving)
      	
Other areas or sensations: 
	
	

	
	

Now, try and think about the emotions you experience during a craving. Check the emo­
tions below that best describe your experience. Add any that are not listed in the space pro­
vided at the end.
      	
Anxiety
      	
Excitement
      	
Anticipation
      	
Restlessness
      	
Irritability

Step 3: Become a “Self Expert”
105
      	
The same emotions I experience when I am drinking or high
      	
Other emotions: 
	
	

	
	

Finally, let’s identify the cognitive (thoughts) part of your experience. Below are some 
common thoughts that accompany cravings. If thoughts are a noticeable part of your experi­
ence during a craving, then place a mark next to the ones that you’ve experienced.
      	
I need it.
      	
I have to have… (I have to have a drink).
      	
If I don’t drink/use I’m going to go crazy.
      	
I can’t handle… (I can’t handle getting sick / the withdrawals / feeling this way).
      	
I can’t get it out of my head.
      	
Other thoughts: 
	
	

	
	

In the next chapter, you will learn a whole new set of skills for coping with crav­
ings. Your job right now is simply to notice everything about them.
CBT Self-­Monitoring Skills
One important set of skills taught in CBT that is central to becoming a self expert is 
self-­monitoring skills. Learning to self-­monitor can help you to understand the psychol­
ogy behind your addiction and begin to control it. By monitoring your experiences 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
106
throughout each day, you become aware of your thoughts and emotions, and the 
behaviors that they are linked with, as they happen. Since most of us are not used to 
“thinking about thinking”—­sometimes referred to as metacognitive skills (Dobson 
2013)—­it can be a little bit challenging at first, especially since our thoughts often go 
through our heads so rapidly that we don’t notice them right way. But with practice, 
you can learn to become more self-­aware, and once you do, you can start building a 
repertoire of CBT and other skills that you can use to change your thinking and 
behavior patterns in ways that support your recovery.
Exercise 5.4 provides you with a craving self-­monitoring form. Using this form, 
you will identify your triggers, thoughts, emotions, and the intensity of your cravings. 
In the first column, write down the date and time of day. Next, you’ll identify the 
situation you were in when you felt triggered. For example, did you experience an 
internal trigger (such as feeling depressed after an argument with your partner) or an 
external trigger (such as attending a party where other people were drinking or using 
in front of you)? Next, you will write down the thoughts that went through your 
mind when you were triggered and the feelings that came up for you in conjunction 
with your thoughts. Finally, you will rate the intensity of your craving on a scale from 
0 to 10, with 0 being no cravings at all, 5 being an average number (meaning that you 
had some cravings but they were not constant or difficult to cope with) and 10 being 
severe, constant cravings. 

Step 3: Become a “Self Expert”
107
Exercise 5.4: Craving Self-Monitoring Form
Date/Time and 
Triggering Situation
Thought(s)
Feelings
Craving Rating  
(0 to 10)

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
108
It would be helpful for you to make copies of the cravings rating form and com­
plete it daily. (You can download the form at the website for this book, http://www
.newharbinger.com/32783.) Try to fill it out in “real time” whenever you can, so that 
the details about your thoughts and the intensity of your cravings are as accurate as 
possible. By self-­monitoring regularly, you may start to identify triggers and thought 
patterns that you weren’t previously aware of that lead to cravings. By raising your 
awareness of your psychological experience as it relates to your addiction, you are 
gaining the knowledge and self-­understanding that you need to be a self expert.
Wrap-­up
Congratulations! You’ve made it through an intense set of exercises, and you are well 
on your way to changing your addictive behaviors. Now that you have intimate 
knowledge of your triggers, thoughts, and cravings, you are well positioned to learn 
to respond differently to the cues that used to lead you straight down a path to drink­
ing or using. Remember to use the self-­monitoring form regularly and complete all of 
the exercises in this chapter so that you can refer back to them as you begin practic­
ing new coping skills. Beginning in the next chapter, you are going to develop a rep­
ertoire of skills to cope with your triggers, thoughts, and cravings without turning to 
alcohol or drugs.

CHAPTER 6
Step 4: Respond to 
Cognitive Distortions
I
n the last chapter, you took a very close look at your triggers, the different types 
of “red flag thoughts” that enter your mind when you find yourself exposed to a 
trigger, and some of the errors in thinking that you are prone to making when 
you are tempted to drink or use. Now that you have a really thorough understanding 
of how triggers convert into cravings or urges, it’s time to start developing a repertoire 
of coping skills that will enable you to get through those urges without turning to 
alcohol or drugs.
Just like it sounds, cognitive behavioral therapy has both cognitive and behavioral 
skills components. So, when you find yourself triggered or tempted to drink or use, 
you have two “go-­to” sets of therapeutic strategies that you can choose from. In this 
chapter, you will learn to use both of these types of skills to cope with the distorted 
thoughts that you experience when you are triggered. As you practice these new skills, 
pay special attention to which ones are the most useful to you, as well as which ones 
don’t work quite as well. From this chapter forward, based on your own observations 
and reflections about your experiences trying out these different techniques, you will 
start forming your individualized relapse prevention plan.
Outsmarting Your Addicted Brain
We’ve talked about your addicted brain and how the exercises in this workbook will 
help you “defeat it” by making your rational brain stronger. That’s what the cognitive 
part of CBT is all about. The red flag thoughts you identified in chapter 5 are the 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
110
byproducts of your addicted brain. This is the part of you that finds ways of justify­
ing a relapse to feed those uncomfortable urges. With practice, you can challenge 
these thoughts successfully and “outsmart” your lower, addicted brain. When you do 
that repeatedly, your rational mindset will start to become the new normal for you, 
and you can begin to break free from the thoughts that have been interfering with 
the goals you’ve set for your recovery.
Thought Challenging
As you learn to outsmart your addicted brain, the most powerful cognitive tech­
nique you will use is the skill of thought challenging. As you practice this method of 
transforming irrational thinking into balanced, realistic thoughts, you will learn to 
take a scientific approach to correcting the thoughts that are leading you down a path 
to self-­destructive behaviors, like drinking and using drugs.
One of the most important things you will get out of learning CBT techniques 
like thought challenging is something that applies not only to overcoming addiction, 
but also to coping with other problems that stem from irrational thoughts (like 
depression, anxiety, and other emotional difficulties). You will learn to understand 
and change your behavior by being scientific, and sticking to the facts. What does that 
mean, exactly? you might be wondering. How can I be “scientific”? It’s not as complicated 
as it might sound, actually. You can achieve this by learning to notice and respond to 
your thoughts in several ways.
1.	 First, to become scientific, you need to practice observing yourself. You are 
already making headway toward becoming an objective observer of your 
experience, having begun to monitor your thoughts and cravings, and iden­
tify your mistakes in thinking.
2.	 Next, you’ll need to practice questioning whether your thoughts are rational—­
especially the ones that relate to drinking or using drugs. Thought chal­
lenging is the process of questioning your thoughts about drinking and 
using by asking yourself if you have evidence that they are true.
3.	 Finally, after you question the evidence for your thoughts, if you find that 
you don’t have evidence to support what you are thinking, then you will 
identify more rational, evidence-­based ideas that you can tell yourself 
instead. These new, healthy and balanced thoughts will help you make the 
behavior changes you set out to accomplish in your recovery plan.

Step 4: Respond to Cognitive Distortions
111
To put the thought challenging process into action, you’re going to need a frame­
work. First, we’ll take a look at a few examples of how to challenge common red flag 
thoughts. Once you get the hang of it, you can complete the worksheet using your 
own examples. This worksheet can be used to review patterns of thinking that have 
led you to drink or use in the past. And if you slip or relapse at any time in the future, 
the exercises can help you (and your treatment provider, if you have one) to under­
stand how the relapse unfolded and what you can do differently going forward.
Scott Gets Triggered
Scott has a strong urge to drink a glass of wine. On a scale from 0 to 10, he rates 
his craving as a 7. He thinks about it and realizes that it is because he is at a party 
with some friends he used to drink with.
Scott can try thought challenging by following three steps, which we will call 
the three T’s: identifying the triggering situation, and the red flag thoughts about 
drinking or using that followed, and placing the thoughts on trial:
Triggering situation: Hanging out with drinking buddies at a party
Red flag thoughts: If I have just one drink, it’s no big deal. I can control it.
Thoughts on trial: Scott puts his thoughts on trial by examining the evidence for 
them. Below you will find the questions he asks to figure out whether his 
addicted brain is driving the thoughts or if they are rational, and the honest 
answers he comes up with.
Questions to Ask to Examine 
the Evidence
The Facts
Is one drink okay?
Yes. Having one drink is not destructive. 
Can I control my drinking enough to stop 
after one drink?
It’s been too long to even remember the 
last time I stopped after one drink. The 
likelihood of that is extremely low.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
112
Result: Now that Scott has used the three T’s to challenge his thoughts, it’s 
time for him to take a look at the result, and take action accordingly. In this 
example, as a result of the thought challenging exercise, Scott can see that his 
thought about having one drink was irrational. Although it is true that one 
drink is not harmful to most people, when he takes an honest look at his past 
patterns of behavior, he can recognize that there is no good evidence that he can 
control his drinking in the way that he wishes to. Even though he might be able 
to have one drink from time to time, before long it would likely lead him back 
to his older patterns of drinking heavily. The idea that he could have “just one 
drink” is exactly the kind of thought that the addicted brain produces to feed 
the urge to drink.
Response: Okay, so Scott had an irrational thought. We all experience irrational 
thoughts, whether they are about drinking or something else. The important 
question that follows is, how can you respond to it? When you respond, your 
goal is to get your mind back on track, to line it back up with your recovery—­
and of course, with reality! To do this, Scott can respond by telling himself the 
following:
•	 For me, one drink is a big deal. In the past, this way of thinking has led me straight 
to a full-­blown relapse.
•	 There is plenty of evidence that I practically never stop after one drink, and I am not 
able to control myself once I start drinking.
Lucy Gets Triggered
Lucy has a strong urge to use cocaine. On a scale from 0 to 10, she rates her craving 
as an 8. She thinks about it and realizes that it is because she is feeling depressed 
and low in energy, and she’s looking for something to “pick her up.”
Lucy tries thought challenging, using the three T’s:
Triggering situation: Feeling depressed and low in energy
Red flag thoughts: Cocaine is the only thing that will make me feel better. It will help 
me get stuff done.

Step 4: Respond to Cognitive Distortions
113
Thoughts on trial: Lucy puts her thoughts on trial as she examines the evidence 
for them:
Questions to Ask to Examine 
the Evidence
The Facts
Will cocaine make me feel better?
At first, yes, it will. But when it wears off, 
I will be even more depressed, and I will feel 
bad about having caved in and used.
Is cocaine the only thing that will make 
me feel better?
Probably not. There are healthier things 
that could make me feel better—­like talking 
to someone, or exercising, or doing 
something fun.
Will cocaine help me get stuff done?
At first, yes, I will have more energy to get 
stuff done. But there are only so many 
things I can do well if I’m high. And then 
when I crash afterward, I might not get 
anything done for days.
Result: Now that Lucy has used the three T’s to challenge her thoughts, she can 
see that her thoughts about using cocaine to feel better and get things done was 
irrational. Although there is some superficial truth to the idea that using cocaine 
could lift her mood in the moment, and help her to get some extra energy, when 
she takes a more thorough and honest look at the evidence, she realizes that the 
longer-­term impact of using, over the days and hours that follow, would counter­
act all of the positives that would come of it.
Response: To get herself back into her recovering mindset, Lucy can respond by 
telling herself the following:
•	 Cocaine makes my depression worse, not better. Even though I might feel good for a 
short time, using always makes me more depressed once it’s over.
•	 There is plenty of evidence that when I use, I am less productive. I get depressed and 
barely do anything for days afterward.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
114
•	 Just because I get more energy for a short time doesn’t mean that using is going to lead 
me to get a lot of stuff done.
Brian Gets Triggered
Brian has a craving to use marijuana. On a scale from 0 to 10, he rates his craving 
as a 7. Upon reflection, he realizes that it’s because he is nervous about going to a 
party by himself, and he’d like to smoke some pot to take the edge off.
Brian tries thought challenging, using the three T’s:
Triggering situation: Going to a party alone and feeling some social anxiety 
about it
Red flag thoughts: If I’m high, I won’t feel so self-­conscious and it won’t be as hard to 
talk to people.
Thoughts on trial: Brian puts his thoughts on trial as he examines the evidence 
that marijuana will help him feel and socialize better at the party.
Questions to Ask to Examine 
the Evidence
The Facts
Will marijuana take the edge off and make 
me feel better?
At first, yes, it will. But when it wears off, 
my mood will be down, and I won’t feel so 
great for a day or two.
Will being high help me handle myself 
better at the party?
Not entirely. I won’t feel as self-­conscious, 
so it will be easier to be there alone. But 
usually when I am high I’m a little 
distant and I don’t really connect well 
with new people. 
Is it worth it to use marijuana in this 
situation?
It will make me feel better in the moment, 
but I probably won’t socialize very much 
at the party. And because of the effect it 
will have on my mood and energy 
afterward, it’s not worth it. 

Step 4: Respond to Cognitive Distortions
115
Result: Now that Brian has used the three T’s to take a closer look at his 
thoughts about using marijuana to cope with his anxiety, he can see that, on 
balance, his thoughts were irrational. Although there is some superficial truth to 
the idea that getting high can reduce his social anxiety, when he takes an honest 
survey of the evidence, he concludes that the negative effects of smoking mari­
juana outweigh the benefits. He asks himself an important question to conclude 
his thought challenging exercise: Is it worth it to use in this situation? This is a 
question that you can use to make a decision about what to do when the results 
of your thought challenging are not crystal clear. In Brian’s case, marijuana use 
has some beneficial effects on his social anxiety, so balancing the positive and 
negative outcomes of using was a helpful way of making a rational decision.
Response: To weigh the evidence for his decision about marijuana use more 
rationally, Brian can respond by telling himself the following:
•	 Getting high makes me a little awkward and distant in social situations. Even though 
I might feel less self-­conscious, I won’t really connect with anyone at the party. In that 
case, there’s not much point in going if I have to get high to get myself there.
•	 There is plenty of evidence that when I use, it affects my mood negatively and I don’t 
function so well for a day or two.
•	 Just because I won’t feel so self-­conscious doesn’t mean that using is worth it.
Superficial Truths: Watch Out for Them!
You might have noticed that in both Brian and Lucy’s examples, they were tempted 
to use by certain thoughts that turned out to be superficial truths. That means that 
some short-­term benefit of drinking or using gives the decision to slip or relapse some 
major appeal. This can get somewhat confusing—­because it is a rational element of 
your thought process about drinking and using. It does feel good at first. That’s true. 
It can relieve anxiety in the short-­term. That’s true. If you really think about it, you 
will find that it makes sense that there are some positive effects that drinking or using 
drugs has on you—­otherwise you wouldn’t have found yourself doing more of it in 
the first place!

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
116
The key is to consider those positives in the bigger context of why you’re trying to 
quit. Yes, it feels good at first in certain situations, but then what happens? What is it 
about the sequence that starts with feeling good that led you to pick up this book and 
work so hard to stop? One of the goals of thought challenging is to be able to recog­
nize when you are allowing yourself to be persuaded to make choices about drinking 
or using by superficial truths, and challenge them.
Exercise 6.1: Thought Challenging Worksheet
Use this worksheet to challenge the evidence for your red flag thoughts using the three T’s.
Triggering situation:  

Red flag thoughts:  

Thought on trial:  

Evidence that the thoughts are accurate:





Step 4: Respond to Cognitive Distortions
117
Evidence that the thoughts are superficial truths or not accurate:




Response (What can you tell yourself to get back into the recovery mindset?):



Responding to the Most Common 
Thought Errors
In chapter 5, you learned about different kinds of mistakes in thinking that can lead 
to red flag thoughts. Before you continue to practice thought challenging using the 
errors in thinking that you wrote down on the Thought Challenging Worksheet, take 
a look at the table that follows for some suggestions about how to respond to the most 
common mistakes in thinking. Remember, the first thing to do once you recognize 
that you’ve made one of the thought errors below is to make yourself aware of it by 
starting an internal dialogue about what just happened. (Okay, wait a minute. I’m start­
ing to do that black-­or-­white thinking again…) Then, once you have become aware of it, 
you can use the three T’s and respond to your thought error using the kinds of 
thoughts or responses you see in the right hand column of the table below.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
118
Thought Error
Red Flag Thoughts
Response
Black-­or-­white 
thought
I messed up everything 
at work; I might as 
well drink.
I didn’t mess up everything. Everyone 
makes mistakes sometimes. Drinking won’t 
fix it; it will make everything worse. 
Discounting 
the positive
My boss only said 
something nice to me 
out of pity. I’m 
pathetic; I have nothing 
to lose by drinking.
Just because I made a mistake at work 
doesn’t mean that all of the positive things 
my boss says to me are untrue. I have a lot 
to lose by drinking; it can only make things 
more problematic at work. That’s why I 
decided to get into recovery. 
Jumping to 
conclusions
With my luck treatment 
won’t work for me. I’ll 
never stay clean and sober. 
There’s no point in trying. 
I won’t know if treatment works until 
I try it and gather some evidence. If 
it’s not working, then I can figure out 
what other options I have. 
Taking your 
feelings too 
seriously
I feel hopeless; therefore 
my life must be hopeless. 
I might as well use. 
Just because I feel a certain way doesn’t 
make it a reality. Feelings can and do 
change. Using won’t change my life 
situation, but working on myself will.
Self-­blame
It’s all my fault that 
I drink too much. 
I’ve ruined my life.
I have a disease, and I am taking positive 
steps to recover. It won’t happen overnight, 
but I can turn things around if I stay 
clean and sober.
Labeling
I drink too much. 
I’m just a loser. 
Having an illness doesn’t make me a loser. 
If I take care of myself and my condition, 
I can recover. 
Spiraling Lapse
I’ve already screwed 
up today by drinking; 
I might as well go all 
out!
The way I respond to a slip can make all 
the difference in my recovery. I don’t have 
to screw up the whole day. If I stop now, 
I can stay on the path to recovery. Every 
decision I make about drinking is 
important. 

Step 4: Respond to Cognitive Distortions
119
Exercise 6.2: Challenging Your Red Flag Thoughts
Now that you have some examples to work from, try the thought-challenging exercise again, 
using one of the thoughts that you wrote down in chapter 5, when you identified your most 
common mistakes in thinking. In this exercise, we’ll assume that you already know what the 
trigger is, and you are making yourself aware of the thought error you’re making.
Red flag thoughts:  
Thoughts on trial:  
Evidence that the thoughts are accurate:  


Evidence that the thoughts are superficial truths or not accurate:  



Response (What can you tell yourself to get back into the recovery mindset?):




The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
120
Now that you’ve had some practice with thought challenging, you can build on 
the self-­monitoring skills you learned in chapter 5, adding on the exercise of challeng­
ing red flag thoughts after you notice them. Practice completing the worksheet that 
follows (also available at http://www.newharbinger.com/32783) on a daily basis, any 
time you get triggered. You can review your entries with your counselor or therapist 
(if you have one) as part of your treatment.
Thinking vs. Doing
Some people can change their behavior by thinking their way through their irrational 
brain’s ideas, challenging them, and converting them into healthy, rational thoughts. 
Sometimes, and for some people, rather than correcting red flag thoughts using cogni­
tive techniques like thought challenging, it works better to change what they’re doing, 
using behavioral coping strategies. There are a few reasons why that might be. For 
some, it has to do with the timing in recovery. That is, in early recovery, when crav­
ings for alcohol and drugs can be very strong and emotions can be overwhelming, it 
might be hard to concentrate or think clearly enough to have the inner dialogue that 
thought challenging requires. For others, it’s just a general preference for getting out 
of their own head. They may find it an easier way of preventing relapse than using a 
cognitive strategy.
Surf the Urge
The average length of a craving is about fifteen minutes. Even though that can feel 
like a lifetime when you’re so uncomfortable physically and emotionally, you might 
find it helpful to keep it in perspective and remember that it will end! For some 
people, it’s useful to imagine the craving as a wave in the ocean—­it will climb until 
it peaks, and then it will crash and subside. If you can get through that brief period 
of time by riding it out, the discomfort will pass, and your recovery will grow stron­
ger. As you are riding the urge out, you will experience the urge sensations weakening 
and going away. The goal is to ride it out without reacting to it by drinking or using. 
You will learn more about how to use similar techniques to this one in the next 
chapter, on becoming mindful.

Step 4: Respond to Cognitive Distortions
121
Exercise 6.3: Thought Challenging Form
Triggering Situation 
Red Flag Thoughts 
Thoughts on Trial 
(Questions I asked 
myself to examine the 
evidence) 

Alternative 
Responses 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
122
Distract Yourself
Have you ever noticed, when you experience an urge to drink or use, that the 
longer you spend thinking about it, the harder it is to resist it? This is a very common 
experience, so if you’ve had it, you are not alone. In a way, thinking about drinking 
or using is like entertaining a fantasy, and the more invested you are in imagining 
how it will play out, the more you want it. The more you want it, the less you are able 
to weigh the pros and cons and make a rational decision about it. With this knowl­
edge, you can choose to distract yourself from the urge before your imagination runs 
away with it and leads you to a relapse. Here are some ways that you can distract 
yourself early on, when you first notice the urge:
•	 Imagine a big, red STOP sign as soon as you feel the urge. Hold that image 
in your mind for as long as you can.
•	 Wear a rubber band around your wrist. If you feel an urge, snap it just to 
distract your attention from it.
•	 If you can, leave the situation that triggered the urge.
•	 Go for a walk or engage in another form of exercise.
•	 Find a distracting activity that can hold your attention for fifteen or twenty 
minutes, whether it’s writing, reading, going somewhere that feels safe, or 
calling someone.
•	 Meditate or use other relaxation exercises. (You will learn more about how 
to do this in the next chapter.)
•	 Pray.
•	 Go to a 12-­step or other self-­help meeting. You can download an app, such 
as The Meeting Finder, onto your phone that will locate the closest meeting 
to you at any time.
•	 Talk to somebody who supports your recovery. This can be a friend, thera­
pist, 12-­step sponsor, or family member. Just talking to somebody can help 
you get through a tough moment, whether you talk about the urge or 
craving itself or a completely different topic.

Step 4: Respond to Cognitive Distortions
123
•	 Use imagery to get your mind to a different place. You can try imagining a 
safe, quiet place, or a place that you would love to be in that moment. Just 
be sure that the place you choose is not compatible with drinking or using.
Start experimenting with these distraction techniques and see what works for 
you. We’ll put them into your personalized relapse prevention plan later. If you think 
of some distracting activities not listed here that are helpful to you, list them here:




Delay the Decision
Now that you have some ideas about how to distract yourself from an urge or 
craving, you can use these distractions to delay the decision about whether or not to 
drink or use for at least fifteen or twenty minutes. This can be a very useful way to 
fight off the impulse to give in to an urge, which usually lasts only fifteen or twenty 
minutes. You’ll find, more often than not, that once you’ve made it through that 
initial period of time and the urge has subsided, it is easier to make a firm commit­
ment to not drink or use. If you are still uncertain after fifteen or twenty minutes, 
repeat the exercise: distract yourself and delay the decision for another fifteen or 
twenty minutes.
Keep a Schedule
Although red flag thoughts and cravings are very common, especially when you 
first quit or cut back on drinking or using drugs, there are ways that you can prevent 
them from coming on in the first place. When you became a self expert in chapter 5, 
you learned how to identify your triggers. One way to build on this skill is to schedule 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
124
how you will spend your days in advance, so you can anticipate when you might find 
yourself in a triggering situation, and plan for it. Consider an example:
Scott’s schedule for Monday is as follows:
7:00 a.m.: Wake up; eat breakfast
8:00 a.m.: Take kids to school
9:00 a.m.: Arrive at work
11:30 a.m.: Meeting with boss**
12:00 p.m.: Lunch hour**
5:00 p.m.: Leave work
6:00 p.m.: Make dinner
6:30–­7:30 p.m.: Dinner, winding down the evening
7:30–­9:30 p.m.: Free time (kids asleep)**
9:30 p.m.–­bedtime: Wife gets home from work; spend time together
**High-­risk or triggering situations
By writing out his schedule, Scott identified three potentially triggering situa­
tions: First, he has been having some difficulties at work, and he gets very stressed 
when he meets with his boss, which has triggered cravings and urges for him in the 
past. His meeting with his boss on Monday is just before lunch hour, and since he 
doesn’t have any lunch meetings, Scott might be tempted to go out for lunch and have 
a glass of wine with his meal—­lunch hour was often the time when he had his first 
drink of the day. Another risky time for him is when he is alone. After putting his 
kids to bed at 7:30, he can anticipate experiencing an urge to drink while waiting for 
his wife to get home from her late shift at work.
Scott will need to plan out what he will do at each of these risky times. The key, 
however, is that he was able to identify them in advance because he wrote out his 
schedule. Finding an effective coping strategy is easiest to do when you’ve planned for 
it. To practice this, use the daily schedule that follows. Once we’ve reviewed some 
more behavioral coping skills that you can use during these risky times, you will start 
using the Urge Planner (exercise 6.5) to plan ahead for them.

Step 4: Respond to Cognitive Distortions
125
Exercise 6.4: Daily Schedule
When you complete your daily schedule, try to fill in as much as you can, including what time 
you wake up, shower, eat, exercise, and work; any appointments you have; social or family 
plans; errands; and anything else you are able to think of. As you begin to keep a detailed 
schedule, notice which planned activities might be triggering for you and place asterisks (**) 
next to them. It will also help to pay attention to blocks of time in your day when you might not 
have anything planned; these, for some people, are vulnerable times when cravings or urges 
often come up. By noticing and paying special attention to these high-­risk times, you can start 
to structure your time more, as needed, with activities that are not compatible with drinking or 
using (for example, going to a 12-­step or other recovery-­oriented meeting, or spending time 
with a sober friend or loved one).
Date: 
7:00 a.m.	

8:00 a.m.	

9:00 a.m.	

10:00 a.m.	

11:00 a.m.	

12:00 p.m.	

1:00 p.m.	

2:00 p.m.	


The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
126
3:00 p.m.	

4:00 p.m.	

5:00 p.m.	

6:00 p.m.	

7:00 p.m.	

8:00 p.m.	

9:00 p.m.	

10:00 p.m.	

11:00 p.m.	

12:00 a.m.	

Planning for High-­Risk Situations
A high-­risk situation is any situation that might be triggering for you. While scheduling 
your time can help you to avoid high-­risk situations, some are unavoidable—­for 
example, stressful interactions with coworkers or family members, obligatory work 
functions where others might be drinking, or any experience that brings up unpleas­
ant emotions. Like Scott, you can plan for upcoming high-­risk situations by thinking 
ahead of time about how you can handle them.

Step 4: Respond to Cognitive Distortions
127
Let’s take one of Scott’s anticipated urges as an example. Scott has a meeting 
scheduled with his boss just before his lunch hour. Those meetings are always stress­
ful, and Scott anticipates that he will be tempted to go out to lunch by himself after­
ward and drink a glass of wine.
To be ready to cope with this situation, Scott needs to have at least two ideas: a 
plan and a backup plan. These are the plans he comes up with:
Plan: Make lunch plans with a friend from work, Bianca, whom I wouldn’t 
drink with during work hours.
Backup plan: Bring lunch to eat at my desk, and schedule a call with my AA 
sponsor for that time, so he can help me if I’m feeling triggered.
Now it’s your turn to use the Urge Planner for any high-­risk situations you might 
have identified in your schedule for the upcoming week.
Exercise 6.5: Urge Planner
What situations do you anticipate this week that will trigger urges to drink or use?
High-­risk situation #1 (include day, time, and situation): 

How can you plan to cope with the urges? 
Plan: 
Backup plans:	(1) 
	
	
	
(2) 
High-­risk situation #2 (include day, time, and situation): 


The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
128
How can you plan to cope with the urges? 
Plan: 
Backup plans:	(1) 
	
	
	
(2) 
High-­risk situation #3 (include day, time, and situation):  

How can you plan to cope with the urges? 
Plan: 
Backup plans:	(1) 
	
	
	
(2) 
Are you someone who gets more out of cognitive strategies than behavioral ones, 
or vice versa? Are both types of skills helpful to you? Does it depend on the situation? 
As you are developing your personal relapse prevention plan, you’ll want to ask your­
self these questions. If this workbook is your first exposure to CBT, then you are still 
in the process of gathering evidence to answer those questions. As you continue your 
cognitive and behavioral coping skills practice, give some thought to which ones work 
for you best, so that you can emphasize them when you make your relapse prevention 
plan in chapter 10.
Wrap-­up
In this chapter, you’ve started to form a repertoire of skills to cope with your triggers, 
thoughts, and cravings without turning to alcohol or drugs. You’ve learned cognitive 

Step 4: Respond to Cognitive Distortions
129
skills, such as identifying red flag thoughts and superficial truths and challenging 
them. You’ve also been practicing behavioral skills, which include distracting yourself 
and keeping a schedule. The best way for you to begin to develop a relapse prevention 
plan that works for you is to continue to practice these techniques week after week 
(including making use of the Urge Planner, the daily schedule, and the thought chal­
lenging form), and make notes in your workbook about the ones that you have found 
to be the most helpful.
All of these skills require practice before using them will come naturally to you in 
a risky situation, so the more you work on them, the better. And don’t be too hard on 
yourself if it doesn’t always occur to you to use them. Just as it took a while for your 
use of alcohol or drugs to form an addiction, it will also take some time for you to 
learn new ways of responding to your urges to drink or use. Be patient with 
yourself.
In the next chapter, you will learn a different, equally useful approach to dealing 
with uncomfortable cravings or urges: rather than trying to change your thoughts or 
distract yourself from them, you are going to practice accepting and exploring them.


CHAPTER 7
Step 5: Become Mindful
N
ow that you are getting a lot of practice with the C of CBT skills (that is, 
the cognitive part), you are becoming more and more skillful at identifying 
mistakes in thinking, challenging them, and coming up with healthier 
alternatives that lead you away from drinking and using. In this chapter, you will 
learn a new set of skills to complement those cognitive therapy techniques.
Remember how we talked about the fact that sometimes it’s hard to think your way 
through an uncomfortable moment when you’re having a craving? Cognitive tech­
niques like thought challenging can be difficult to use at times, especially when the 
craving feels very powerful, or you can’t clear your head, or you’re too overwhelmed 
to come up with healthier thoughts to replace the irrational ones. Mindfulness skills 
can be very helpful to you in a moment like that. When you use mindfulness tech­
niques, rather than trying to change what you’re thinking, or come up with alterna­
tives, you learn to accept and tolerate unpleasant thoughts or experiences (such as 
cravings) without drinking or using in response to them.
The purpose of this chapter is to give you a basic understanding of what mindful­
ness is, to show you how mindfulness techniques and meditation can be helpful to 
you in your recovery, and to give you some practice exercises so that you can familiar­
ize yourself with how to use them.
What Is Mindfulness?
Mindfulness, one of the most widely used and studied forms of meditation, was first 
introduced to Western psychology by Dr. Jon Kabat-Zinn at the University of 
Massachusetts Medical School (Kabat-Zinn 1990). He developed an eight-week 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
132
program called mindfulness-based stress reduction, originally to help people with 
chronic pain; from there, the treatment was extended to individuals suffering from 
anxiety and depression (Kabat-Zinn et al. 1992; Roemer and Orsillo 2003; Ramel et 
al. 2004; Evans et al. 2008) and cancer (Carlson et al. 2004), and finally to normal, 
healthy adults struggling with stress (Astin 1997; Shapiro, Schwartz, and Bonner 
1998; Williams et al. 2001).
If you’re not experienced with meditation, you are probably wondering what 
mindfulness is, exactly. Mindfulness is defined as “awareness that emerges through 
paying attention, on purpose, in the present moment, and non-­judgmentally to the 
unfolding of experience, moment by moment.” (Kabat-­Zinn 2003, 145). Let’s take a 
look at what that means:
•	 Awareness: We all have habits or ways of behaving that we’ve been doing the 
same way for so long that we don’t even notice when they are happening. 
Drinking or using in response to certain triggers (like stress or negative 
feelings) can be one of those habits. When you learn to be mindful, you 
become aware of the sequence of experiences you have that lead you to 
drink or use, before it actually happens. There are many parts of your expe­
rience that you can learn to be aware of, including the physical sensations 
throughout your body, your breathing, your thoughts, your intentions, and 
your emotions.
•	 …that emerges through paying attention, on purpose, in the present moment: Our 
attention naturally wanders from one thing to another. We are often dis­
tracted from something we are paying attention to by our own thoughts or 
feelings or things that are happening in our environment. One of the ways 
to learn to be aware of our experience in the here and now is to become 
purposefully attentive to it. That often means recognizing when something 
has distracted us, and purposely redirecting our attention to the here and 
now experience. In recovery, paying attention, on purpose, to the experi­
ence of a craving or a negative feeling can help you to learn more about 
yourself and your addiction, and to find your way through the craving or 
negative emotion without trying to run away from it by drinking or using.
•	 …nonjudgmentally: Whatever our experience is, we are used to labeling 
things. Do you ever find yourself saying to yourself when you feel upset, 

Step 5: Become Mindful
133
something like, I shouldn’t feel upset? If so, you are not the only one who does 
that; it’s what minds naturally do. We often judge our experience; we label 
it as good or bad, justified or unjustified, given the circumstances. When 
you experience an urge to drink or use, maybe you judge it, feel guilty 
about it, or wish that it weren’t there. It comes very naturally—­partly as a 
way of making sense of our experience and our world—­to label, evaluate, 
or otherwise judge what we feel. When you practice mindfulness, you 
reserve those judgments, accepting each aspect of your experience just the 
way it is. An important part of this is bringing a gentle kindness to your 
experience, as a way of showing compassion to yourself. As you probably 
already know, recovery has a lot of uncomfortable moments. Paying atten­
tion to those moments on purpose, with compassion and without judging 
yourself for them, is one powerful way to find your way through them.
•	 …to the unfolding of experience, moment by moment: Our experiences are all tem­
porary. Feelings change, thoughts come in and out of our minds, and physi­
cal sensations come and go. We can’t predict how our experiences are going 
to change from one moment to the next, but when practicing mindfulness, 
we can observe the way our thoughts, emotions, and bodily sensations 
unfold, and learn about them with open curiosity. As you get better at 
becoming an observer of your experience without reacting to it in the moment, 
you will gain better control over the way that you cope with difficult 
experiences.
Why Mindfulness?
Now that you have a good sense of what mindfulness is, you are probably wondering 
how it can be useful for addiction. It is only in very recent years that this approach 
has been adapted specifically to help people with addictions, based on several known 
facts about mindfulness and drug and alcohol problems:
•	 Mindfulness is very helpful for managing stress, which is one of the most 
common triggers for relapse to alcohol and drug use (Hanson 2002; Sinha 
2007, 2008; Tate et al. 2008).

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
134
•	 Heavy use of alcohol or drugs can cause damage to certain areas of the 
brain that enable you to think of a healthy way to cope with stress when 
you are confronted with it in the moment. These are areas of the brain that 
help you think through possible ways to manage a problem or stressor, and 
at the same time control your impulse to use unhealthy coping strategies 
that will give you a “quick fix”—­like drinking or using drugs (Sinha 2008).
•	 Mindfulness can help you retrain your brain to take a thoughtful approach 
to respond to the stress, rather than reacting to it impulsively by using alcohol 
or drugs, or engaging in other self-­destructive behaviors.
•	 Studies show that practicing mindfulness helps relieve depression and 
anxiety, which are two of the most common psychological symptoms that 
are experienced by people with addictions (Glasner-­Edwards et al. 2009; 
Breslin, Zack, and McMain 2002; Marlatt, 1996). Like stress, these symp­
toms often lead to relapse, so by learning to manage them, you increase 
your chances of long-­term recovery. In fact, a recent study proved this 
pattern exactly: adults with drug addiction who received mindfulness 
training showed improvements in symptoms of depression and anxiety, 
and learning mindfulness techniques for recovery was especially useful to 
addicts with diagnosed depression and anxiety, in improving their sub­
stance use (Glasner-­Edwards et al., forthcoming).
•	 Studies show that practicing mindfulness reduces cravings for alcohol and 
drugs (Witkiewitz, Lustyk, and Bowen 2013) and is helpful to people who 
are in recovery from addictions in preventing relapse (Bowen et al. 2014).
Getting Started: Being Present
When you get out of bed in the morning and start getting ready to begin your day, is 
your mind in the present, or is it off somewhere else? Here’s an example of how you’d 
know: When you’re brushing your teeth in the morning, are you paying attention to 
the way that the bristles feel as they circle around against your teeth, or the minty 
sensation of the toothpaste in your mouth? Chances are, the answer is no. When you 
brush your teeth, your mind is probably doing what minds naturally do—­they plan 

Step 5: Become Mindful
135
and anticipate what’s to come, and when they are not jumping into the future, they 
are reviewing past experiences. So you might be thinking about the day ahead of you, 
reminding yourself what time your first commitment starts, or planning how you are 
going to approach a meeting or interaction you know you are going to have that day. 
Maybe you’re reviewing something that happened yesterday or last week, playing a 
tape of it back in your mind.
This “mode” of doing things without being present as you do them, is called auto­
matic pilot (Bowen, Chawla, and Marlatt 2010). You can do a lot of things in automatic 
pilot mode, especially things that you do every day. Certain elements of your daily 
routine (like brushing your teeth, taking a shower, eating breakfast, or driving to 
work or school) are so well rehearsed, that you don’t need to think about them as you 
are doing them. Your mind feels free to wander, and it makes its way into the past or 
the future. When you learn mindfulness skills, you purposely keep your mind in the 
here and now, gently bringing it back to the present whenever it wanders off.
What does this have to do with addiction? you might be wondering. The concept of 
automatic pilot is actually very relevant to addiction, and here’s how: Over time, 
addictive behaviors become like habits. Have you ever found yourself drinking or 
using without being completely aware of how or why you started? It’s something 
you’ve probably done many times without really thinking about it, or without any 
awareness that there were thoughts, emotions, and possibly physical sensations that 
led up to it (Marlatt and Ostafin 2005). As you learn to become more connected to 
your experience in the present, you can begin to make a shift from reacting automati­
cally and out of habit to your thoughts and feelings to making mindful choices about 
your behavior (especially those that involve drugs and alcohol) with kindness and 
self-­compassion. These mindful choices about drinking and using become available 
to you when you are tuned in and aware of your urges and cravings as they occur.
To begin to step out of automatic pilot, you are going to be introduced to a series 
of exercises. When you practice the principles of mindfulness, try not to judge your­
self. If you are new to mindfulness or to meditation in general, the exercises may 
seem a little awkward. You may find yourself wondering whether or not you’re 
doing them right. Remember that there is no right or wrong when you are practicing 
mindfulness; you are simply learning to observe your experience. Whether the 
experience feels good, bad, strange, or neutral, you will simply observe it, bringing 
your mind gently and kindly back to it whenever it wanders (and it will, because all 
minds do!). This is a skill that takes practice, so try to be patient. You’ll get the 
hang of it with time.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
136
Exercise 7.1: Observe Your Body
To become an observer of your experience, you will first need a little bit of practice with the 
skill of observing. In this first exercise, you are going to practice observing your body, or your 
physical self. Keep in mind that this exercise is not intended to make you feel a certain way; 
it is not a relaxation exercise, but rather an exercise in observation. What you are practic­
ing here is becoming present and aware of your physical body, whether that feels relaxing, 
neutral, or even uncomfortable. Just observe it, whatever it is.
Begin by sitting in a comfortable position, taking a moment to notice the movement of 
your breath, the rising and the falling of your chest with each inhale and exhale. Stay with 
your breath in this way for a minute. When you’re ready, bring your awareness to the physical 
sensations in your body, beginning with the sensations of your body making contact with your 
chair, and your feet making contact with the ground. Just take a moment to observe how that 
feels. If you’re feeling restless, or distracted by thoughts, sounds, or things that you can see in 
your environment, just congratulate yourself for noticing that your mind has wandered, and 
gently bring yourself back to awareness of your body.
Now bring your awareness to your feet. Notice any sensations you have in your feet, 
paying attention to their temperature, the way their contact with your shoes (if you’re wearing 
any) feels, the sensations of the toes touching each other, and any sensations on the sole, top 
of the foot, and ankle.
Moving away from the feet, bring your awareness to your legs. Use your awareness of 
your legs to explore every sensation there, beginning with anything you feel in your calves, 
your knees, and your thighs. Pay attention to the areas of your legs that make contact with 
your chair, noticing the sensations there.
Now gently guide your awareness to your hips and waist. If you observe any pain or dis­
comfort, just practice being aware of it and letting it be as it is. Moving your awareness to 
your back, begin with your lower back and bring your attention to any sensations there. Now 
move to your upper back, paying attention to where your back makes contact with your chair. 
Notice any tension or discomfort.
Next, guide your attention to your arms. Beginning at your hands and moving upward, 
bring your awareness to any sensations you feel in your wrists, forearms, elbows, upper arms, 
and finally, shoulders. Now focus your attention on your neck. Notice any tension there. 
Moving up the neck, begin exploring the sensations on your face. Bring your attention to the 
sensations you feel on your forehead, eyelids, eyebrows, nose, and cheeks.
Moving to your lips, bring your attention to your jaw and chin. Just notice any sensations 
there. Then bring your awareness to the very top of your head. Now that you’ve explored the 

Step 5: Become Mindful
137
sensations in the various parts of your body, just take a few moments to experience your body 
as a whole, connecting again with your breath as you did when you began this exercise.
The intention behind doing exercises like this, that teach you to use mindful awareness when 
paying attention to your body, is to help you learn the skill of being present. It sounds simple, but 
it takes a tremendous amount of practice for most people to get comfortable with this. When 
doing any mindfulness meditation practice, try and remember to approach it with these few 
points in mind (which were reviewed earlier, but you are reminded of them here for emphasis):
•	 This exercise is not intended to help you relax or have a certain kind of new experience 
within your body. Try to let go of any expectations about how this exercise will feel, and 
just let it be whatever it is. Remember that the purpose of the exercise is to be present 
and aware of whatever your experience is.
•	 If you get distracted, or you feel strange doing the exercise, or if you like or dislike it, 
just notice those aspects of your experience and gently bring your attention back to 
the exercise.
•	 Be open and curious about your experience, without judging or trying to change 
it. Practice accepting your experience just the way that it is. You can even try telling 
yourself, This is just the way things are right now. This can be helpful to you when you 
are practicing the exercise itself or when you are using mindfulness in your daily life, 
to cope with uncomfortable emotions, urges, cravings, or other experiences that you 
may find stressful or difficult.
Living Mindfully
Daily life is full of opportunities to practice mindfulness, without a workbook in 
front of you. Think about all of the things that you do automatically, without think­
ing. Take driving, for example. When you are driving your car, do you pay attention 
to what your foot feels like when it makes contact with the gas pedal, or when it 
shifts from the gas pedal to the brake? Are you aware of the coordination between 
your hands on the steering wheel and the continuous movements of your feet, inte­
grating your mind’s intentions to head straight or turn right, and slow down or speed 
up at the same time? If you’re like most people, the answer to these questions is “no.” 
When you’re driving, you are probably planning what you are going to do when you 
arrive at your destination, or what you’ll be doing later that day. Maybe your mind 
fast-forwards to the weekend, and what you have planned. Maybe you think about 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
138
things that you are worried about. Or maybe you are talking on the phone as you 
drive, and it’s that conversation that occupies your mind’s space.
Driving is just one example of things that we can do easily in automatic pilot 
mode. Other things we do without being present include eating, bathing, washing our 
hands, and walking. In this next exercise, you are going to try a few of these daily 
activities with mindful awareness.
Exercise 7.2: Bringing Mindfulness Practice into 
Your Daily Life
Practice being present and aware as you do each of the activities below. As you pay attention 
to your experience, notice how your mind naturally wanders away from the activity and gently 
bring it back to the present moment.
After you complete each exercise, ask yourself some questions about it: What did you 
experience? What did you notice? Were there sensations (physical sensations, feelings, smells, 
or other sensations) that you were not aware of before you approached the activity in this 
way? What were they? Jot down some of your observations in the space provided after each 
exercise.
Take a Mindful Shower
The mindful shower is a nice way to begin your day with awareness. This could set the tone 
for your entire day, helping you to notice when you are in automatic pilot so that you can 
purposely shift your attention to the present moment.
Begin by slowly setting your right foot into the shower, paying attention to the sensation of 
your foot making contact with the floor. Transferring the weight of your body entirely to your 
right foot and leg, notice, as you lift your left foot and move it forward to join your right foot 
on the shower floor, the sensations in your left leg as it rises into the air, and in your left foot 
as it makes contact with the floor. Notice your body’s stability in this standing position.
As you turn on the shower, move the dial slowly, paying attention to the way your hand 
grasps the dial, and the intention with which it moves the dial to the position that turns it on 
and adjusts it to your preference. Guide your attention to the sensations you feel on your skin 
as the droplets of water make contact with it. Pay attention to the temperature of the water 
and how the temperature of your skin changes as the water touches it.
Next, spend a few moments guiding your awareness to the sounds that you hear as the 
water emerges from the showerhead and makes contact with your body. If you find that your 

Step 5: Become Mindful
139
mind is wandering, worrying, planning, reviewing, or thinking about anything else, congratulate 
yourself for noticing this and guide your awareness back to the present moment, in the shower.
Notice any smells. Maybe the soap has a familiar smell. Spend a few moments guiding 
your attention to anything you can smell.
After you get out of the shower, see if you can continue your routine of getting ready with 
this mindful approach. Then make some notes about your experience.
My observations during my mindful shower:  




Eat Mindfully
In this exercise, you will pay attention to your experience of eating, moment by moment. Try 
it with a piece of fruit—­an apple, orange, or banana. When you try this for the first time, 
remember that it will be just you having a few minutes with the fruit, so keep the television and 
radio off, and try to minimize sources of distraction.
First, without holding it yet, take a look at the fruit as though you’ve never seen it before. 
Notice its shape, its color, and any other features that you can see. Pay attention to whether 
it needs to be peeled to be eaten. After you’ve taken in its appearance, pick up the fruit and 
look at it more closely. Notice if your mind wanders or if you find yourself making any judg­
ments about the activity itself. When this happens, be kind to yourself, gently bringing your 
attention back to the fruit.
Next, bring the fruit to your ear to see if it makes any sounds. Gently acknowledge any 
impatience or other feelings that come up during the exercise, bringing your attention back 
to the fruit each time. Now bring the fruit near to your nose, observing whether you are able 
to smell it, and if so, how it smells—­whether the smell is familiar, sweet, sour, or neutral.
As you prepare to take a bite, bring it slowly to your mouth, but before your mouth makes 
contact, notice how it is preparing to receive the fruit. Notice whether saliva is forming and 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
140
where on your tongue you can feel it. As you take a bite from the fruit, notice how it feels 
resting inside of your mouth. Keep it there for a moment before you begin to chew it, notic­
ing how it feels, and what the sensations in your mouth are like, once the fruit is resting 
inside of it. When you begin to chew it, pay attention to the flavors that it releases, how the 
texture of the fruit changes as you continue to chew it, and the way it feels between your 
teeth. Notice when the intention to swallow begins, and how that feels. Finally, as you begin 
to swallow, pay attention of the movement of the fruit into the back of your mouth, and your 
esophagus.
Repeat this practice as you take your next bites out of the fruit. You might even reflect, in 
between bites, on how this fruit was grown and cared for, both by conditions of nature and by 
the actions of human beings, until you were able to bring it home. This may help you to rec­
ognize how things around you are connected—­even something as simple as a piece of fruit.
My observations during mindful eating:  




Walk Mindfully
For this activity, choose a space, perhaps in your home, where you have some room to walk 
around—­such as a long hallway or a room with enough space to walk in a circle. It will be 
helpful if you can have somebody read these instructions to you while you practice.
Begin by standing still, noticing the physical sensations on the bottom of your feet, where 
they make contact with the floor, and noticing the weight of your body that is supported by 
your legs and feet. When you are ready, slowly shift the weight of your body onto your right 
foot, noticing the sensations that you experience in your right leg and foot as you relieve your 
left leg from your weight. Then, as you lift your left foot from the ground, guide your attention 
to the sensations in your left foot and leg as they lift, and then as they descend downward and 
forward, and the heel makes contact with the ground.

Step 5: Become Mindful
141
With your left foot firmly on the ground, gently guide your awareness to the sensations 
you feel as you shift your body weight to the left side, noticing how the weight of your body 
is received by your left leg and foot, and noticing the sensation of lightness on your right leg 
and foot as they are relieved of the weight. Now, gently lift your right foot from the ground 
and, as you move it forward, pay attention to the sensations in your right leg and foot as you 
place your right heel to the floor, shifting your weight off of the left leg and foot and on to 
the right side.
Notice the patterns of changing sensations in your two legs and feet as you make this 
step. If your mind wanders away from this process of walking, simply notice it and gently bring 
your attention back to the sensations in your legs and feet. Practice walking mindfully for a 
few minutes.
My observations during mindful walking:  




Breathing Mindfully
Since we are all breathing all of the time, mindful breathing can be a “go-­to” skill that 
you can use any time, in any situation, as a way of redirecting your attention to the 
present moment. It can be very useful when you are first trying to learn mindfulness 
skills, as you can use it like this: Any time you are having difficulty guiding your 
attention to a particular sensation, you can always just spend a few moments focusing 
on your breath, and then return to the specific activity that you were doing. In addic­
tion recovery, mindful breathing can be a very useful tool when you experience an 
uncomfortable emotion or craving. Once you learn how to breathe mindfully, you’ll 
have a mindfulness technique you can use specifically for coping with cravings or 
urges to drink or use. Let’s begin with a brief practice of breathing with awareness.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
142
Exercise 7.3: Breathing with Awareness
Like all of the other exercises you’ve completed so far, remember when you try this one that 
it is not intended to change the way you breathe or to relax you (even though you might find 
that one or both of these things occur). The purpose of the exercise is simply to become aware 
of your breath and to observe it with openness and curiosity. You can begin by doing this 
exercise for about five minutes, and as you practice it more often, you can increase the time 
you spend on it to as long as thirty minutes, if it is comfortable to do so.
Begin by finding a comfortable place to sit. Bring your awareness to the way your body 
feels in the chair, and to where it makes contact with the chair and the floor. Spend a few 
moments exploring these sensations.
When you are ready, turn your attention to your breath. Notice how your breath enters 
your body through your nose and moves through your body to your lungs. You may notice that 
your abdomen rises and falls with each inhale and exhale. If it is helpful in connecting your 
attention to the experience of breathing, you can try placing your hand on your abdomen.
Observe whatever you can about your breath, with openness and curiosity. Gently guide 
your attention to the temperature of your breath, noticing if it becomes cooler or warmer as 
you breathe in and as you breathe out. Notice the air entering your body with each inhale 
and exiting your body with each exhale.
Whether your breathing is slow or fast, deep or shallow, just allow your body to breathe 
how it breathes naturally, without judging it or trying to change it in any way. As thoughts 
enter your mind, just notice them and allow them to be there, gently guiding your awareness 
back to your breath. Practice breathing with awareness in this way for a few minutes.
Putting It All Together: Using Mindfulness 
for Addiction Recovery
You might be wondering how mindful breathing, showering, and walking are going to 
help you recover successfully from your addiction. They may seem unrelated, but 
now that you have practiced a little bit of mindful awareness, you can apply what 
you’ve learned to help you cope with urges and temptations to use alcohol or drugs, 
without slipping into automatic pilot mode (which can lead you to unhealthy deci­
sions and behaviors, like relapsing). The practice of remaining connected with your 

Step 5: Become Mindful
143
present experience can help you get through a craving without relapsing for the fol­
lowing reasons:
•	 One of the ways that you might naturally react to a craving is to try to avoid 
the discomfort that it brings. Drinking or using is one way that you might 
have avoided that discomfort in the past. If you can learn to accept, toler­
ate, and even curiously observe the sensations you experience during a 
craving, you can break that cycle of drinking or using to avoid those 
sensations.
•	 Your automatic reaction to a temptation (such as alcohol or drugs in your 
immediate environment) or to a specific trigger (such as an unpleasant 
emotion) is to drink or use. When you practice mindful awareness, rather 
than reacting to the temptation, you can learn how to thoughtfully and 
mindfully respond to it.
What’s the difference between reacting and responding? you might be wondering. Reacting 
is something that we do automatically, without thinking. When we feel that we are 
standing too close to something hot, such as a fire, we react intuitively by moving 
away from it. Our intuition says, That doesn’t feel good; it can hurt you. Get away from it. 
When you are addicted to something, your intuition may not lead you to a healthy 
decision that favors your recovery. Remember that intuition is not something that 
involves weighing the consequences of your behavior. If you rely on your intuition, 
you may react to temptations and difficult situations in ways that feel self-­protective 
(such as drinking or using to eliminate discomfort), but are not.
When you practice being connected with your experience of temptations and 
uncomfortable sensations during a craving, you can begin to trace these experiences 
back and understand how they have led you to automatic responses such as drinking 
or using in the past. In the here and now, when you practice mindfulness during a 
craving, you can connect with what is happening and observe it first, and then decide, 
with awareness, how you would like to choose to respond to it. When you approach your 
experience this way, rather than letting your addicted brain guide you to an auto­
matic, conditioned response to a craving or temptation (like drinking or using), you 
can exercise more control over your behavior, weighing its consequences before you 
act. In this next exercise, you will learn a mindfulness technique that you can use 
when you experience a craving or temptation to drink or use.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
144
Exercise 7.4: SOBER Breathing
Now that you have some experience with mindful breathing, this technique for connecting 
with the present moment will probably be very easy for you to learn. It takes just a minute or 
two to practice, making it an ideal go-­to skill when you’re in a tempting, stressful, or otherwise 
upsetting situation. You can use the acronym SOBER to help you remember the steps (Bowen, 
Chawla, and Marlatt 2010), summarized below:
1.	 Stop: When you find yourself in a tempting situation, the first thing you need to do to 
connect with the present moment is to stop and step out of automatic pilot mode. When 
you stop, you interrupt that automatic sequence of behaviors that can follow a craving 
or a strong emotion, and it’s that very sequence that you are working on changing when 
you are in addiction recovery.
2.	 Observe: Once you’ve stopped and stepped out of automatic pilot, the next step is to 
observe your experience. Observe what is happening, right in the moment. Ask yourself 
what you are feeling right now. Using the example of a craving, observe where you feel it 
in your body, any thoughts you have about drinking or using, and any emotions you might 
be experiencing. Notice yourself allowing the presence of these uncomfortable aspects of 
your experience—­letting them be just as they are, rather than pushing them away.
3.	 Breathe: You’ve taken yourself out of automatic pilot and observed your present experi­
ence. The next step is to connect with your breath. Take a moment to do this, guiding your 
attention to the movement of your breath.
4.	 Expand your awareness: Broadening your focus from the movement of your breath, you 
can now expand your awareness to include your entire body as a whole, connecting with 
all of the sensations you are experiencing in the present moment.
5.	 Respond mindfully: We’ve been talking about responding with mindful awareness, rather 
than reacting in automatic pilot. This is the final step in the SOBER breathing exercise. 
Now that you have connected with your experience and your breath, you can consider 
the range of choices that you have in this situation. Recognize that you can accept the 
discomfort that you’re feeling. And while you are allowing it to be there, just as it is, you 
can still respond by choosing, with mindful awareness, what action to take. You are in 
a better place to consider the consequences of the different choices you can make, and 
choose to respond to the discomfort you are experiencing in a way that is nurturing, self-­
protective, and consistent with your recovery goals.

Step 5: Become Mindful
145
One way that you can begin to practice the SOBER breathing exercise is to imagine a 
situation in which you would tempted to drink or use. As you picture yourself in this situa­
tion, practice the SOBER mindful awareness technique. First, stop. Next, observe what is 
happening to you as you imagine yourself in this situation, focusing on any discomfort you 
feel physically, emotionally, or in your thoughts. The goal is to acknowledge the discomfort 
without judging yourself for it or trying to change it. Third, focus on your breath. Then expand 
your awareness to include your whole body, noticing any sensations you might be experienc­
ing. And finally, imagining yourself in this risky situation, think about the choices that you can 
make, as part of the process of responding mindfully. Ask yourself how you can best take care 
of yourself and preserve your recovery in this situation.
Imagine yourself making the best choice you could in that situation, the response that 
will keep you clean and sober. Maybe it’s leaving the situation, or calling a friend, or finding 
a way to distract yourself. Whatever response you decide upon, guide your attention to the 
way that you feel after making this choice, noticing the sensations you experience in your 
body, how you are feeling emotionally, and any thoughts you might be having. Following this 
exercise, jot down a few notes about anything you noticed as you used the SOBER breathing 
technique, including any sensations, thoughts, emotions, or judgments you might have had 
about your experience.
My observations during my SOBER breathing exercise:  




To become comfortable enough with the SOBER breathing technique to use it any time 
you need a “go-­to” skill to cope with an unpleasant emotion or craving, try practicing using 
it in a range of situations:
Start by practicing when you’re feeling stressed. Write down some notes about your sensa­
tions, thoughts, and feelings, and any judgments, distractions, or other aspects of your experi­
ence. Was it helpful in this situation?

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
146
My observations from using SOBER in a stressful situation:  



Try the exercise when you experience an unpleasant emotion—­such as sadness, anxiety, 
anger, or any other emotion that you tend to react to in automatic pilot mode, without think­
ing about it.
My observations from using SOBER in response to an unpleasant emotion: 



Try using SOBER breathing when you experience a temptation or craving to drink or use.
My observations from using SOBER in response to an urge or temptation: 




Step 5: Become Mindful
147
Acceptance
Throughout this chapter, whether you’ve realized it or not, you’ve been working on 
acceptance. Each of the mindfulness meditation exercises you’ve done so far has 
involved some instruction about letting whatever you experience be as it is, even if 
it is unpleasant. That is the practice of acceptance. Why is this so important in 
recovery, you might be wondering? It is important because acceptance is the oppo­
site of what your addicted brain tells you to do. Learning to practice acceptance can 
help you conquer your addicted brain, and put your rational brain in charge.
You might recall learning, in chapter 1, about the addicted brain’s tendency to 
get stuck in go mode. The go mode is the part of you that says, Get rid of that craving 
before it feels any worse. Go. Have a drink, or You don’t have to feel sad. Go. Smoke some 
weed. You’ll feel so much better. Or if you tend to use when you feel good rather than 
when you feel bad, your addicted brain might be saying, Why let this good feeling end? 
Go. Use some cocaine. Until now, the voice of your addicted brain has led you to use 
alcohol or drugs either to avoid unpleasant feelings or to prolong positive ones.
One of the biggest challenges this poses in recovery is that the more you follow 
your tendency to try and avoid or get rid of the unpleasant feelings and sensations 
that cravings bring about, the more intense they tend to get. The same goes for 
other uncomfortable emotions, such as sadness, grief, anxiety, or anger. When you 
try to run away from these feelings, they usually come back stronger. A key aspect 
of practicing mindfulness is learning to accept that discomfort is there, while rec­
ognizing at the same time that your actions don’t have to be dictated by your 
natural desire to get rid of it. Here are a few things you can tell yourself to practice 
acceptance:
•	 It’s okay for me to see things just as they are right now, as opposed to the way I think 
they should be.
•	 Just because I accept the way that I am feeling right now, it doesn’t mean that I am 
satisfied with the way things are, or that I have to give up on trying to make things 
better.
•	 Once I see things for what they are, then I can find the energy to heal and to change 
what is here.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
148
Hillary’s Story
Hillary, a thirty-­four-­year old woman in recovery from alcohol and cocaine 
addiction, lost her mom six months ago. Before that time, she had been sober for 
nearly three months, and she helped her mother through a very difficult battle with 
cancer before she died. After losing her mom, Hillary relapsed and started drinking 
and using cocaine again. She felt like she just couldn’t tolerate the sadness and the 
emptiness, and drinking and using was the only way that she could escape it.
About two weeks ago, Hillary realized that the alcohol and cocaine she was 
using were making her feel more and more depressed, so she decided to try getting 
sober again. In the first few weeks of her recovery, a lot of sad thoughts and feelings 
come rushing in about her mom, and at those moments, Hillary feels strong urges 
to drink and use. When she begins practicing mindfulness, Hillary becomes more 
comfortable with the idea of acceptance.
She starts to use the SOBER exercise during moments of sadness and grief about 
her mom. When she observes those feelings in her mind and body, she brings her 
attention to her breath. Using her breath to connect her attention to her mind and 
body in the present moment, she is able to feel a little bit stronger and more able to 
allow herself to feel the different emotions about her loss, and to say to herself, It’s 
okay for me to feel what I’m feeling right now. It may not be what I want to feel, but I can 
tolerate and accept it for what it is. I seem to be coping with it better than I thought I could. 
I will just keep on trying to be present with it, since trying to escape it doesn’t really help.
With these thoughts in mind, she continues to practice breathing into the 
experience and staying present with it, without turning to alcohol or cocaine to try 
to numb it. Her sadness gradually becomes something that she can tolerate and 
accept.
Compassion and Kindness
Kindness and compassion are both characteristics that can enable you to practice 
mindfulness. For those of us who have the tendency to be self-­critical, even though it 

Step 5: Become Mindful
149
may come naturally to take a kind and compassionate approach to understanding 
and communicating with others, we don’t necessarily use that same approach toward 
ourselves. Being mindful is about being present in a nonjudgmental way; whatever 
arises when practicing mindfulness, if you can have a kind and friendly spirit toward 
it, you will be less likely to judge or criticize yourself for it. If you’re distracted or 
bothered by an urge or craving to drink or use when you are practicing mindfulness 
meditation, and are able to connect with the experience with a kind and welcoming 
spirit, this will have the effect of making you more open to your experience, and more 
able to be present with it. Judgment, and the desire to escape or avoid things that are 
unpleasant or unfamiliar, will be less likely to interfere with your mindfulness 
practice.
Compassion is a close relative of kindness, but it is not exactly the same thing. 
Compassion is a tender and sympathetic emotional reaction to the presence of pain 
or sorrow. When you practice mindfulness, having compassion for yourself will help to 
relieve you of negative and critical inner dialogues. These dialogues not only interfere 
with your ability to remain present, but they can easily drive you to use alcohol or 
drugs. When you approach your own pain and sorrow with compassion, you can 
make choices about how to respond mindfully to those experiences in a way that is 
nurturing and self-­protective, preserving your recovery.
Wrap-­up
In this chapter you had the opportunity to learn about what mindfulness is, and how 
developing a practice of mindfulness can be helpful to you in your recovery. By acquir­
ing the skills that enable you to approach daily life mindfully, you are making great 
strides in accepting the discomfort that you naturally face during recovery and taking 
a more open, accepting approach to dealing with it. This is not an easy thing to do, 
but with practice, you can use this approach to stay in control of your responses to 
cravings and other difficult experiences, rather than reacting to these experiences 
impulsively, with your addicted brain in the driver’s seat.
In the next chapter, you’re going to find ways to increase joy, pleasure, and fulfill­
ment in your life. With mindfulness skills in your back pocket, you will be able to 
experience these positive emotions at a deeper level.


CHAPTER 8
Step 6: Rediscover 
Rewards
B
y now, you have learned a lot about how to cope with triggers and cravings. 
You know all about the kinds of situations, places, people, and things that 
make you vulnerable to relapsing, and you can plan ahead for how you are 
going to deal with them. But there is a big gap that still needs to be addressed to make 
your recovery plan complete. Now that you are not going to be drinking or using, 
what will you do to fill the void that the absence of alcohol and drugs will leave in 
your life?
Let’s face it: you are working your way through this book because you know that 
drinking or using has become destructive in your life. But knowing that doesn’t mean 
that giving it up is easy. It doesn’t mean that you don’t miss the escape or the positive 
feelings that you used to get from alcohol or drugs. And you might find that, when 
you are early in the process of recovery, your mood is up and down, and you don’t 
enjoy many things that you used to. Not everybody feels that way, but a large major­
ity of people who are in recovery feel that way at first. So, if you’re wondering what 
you’re going to get those pleasurable feelings from, if not from drinking or using, you 
are not alone. In this chapter, you will discover and rediscover rewarding activities for 
your recovering brain and body, and learn how to overcome some of the barriers that 
stand in the way of experiencing joy.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
152
The Role of Rewards in Addiction 
and Recovery
Rewards are a central part of all of our lives; they are the reason we are motivated to 
get up in the morning, take care of our responsibilities (whether those involve work, 
household, or other duties), and maintain a social life, family relationships, and 
hobbies. All of these things that we spend our time doing, we do because we antici­
pate that they will bring us rewards: emotional, financial, physical, and other types 
of rewards that provide joy and pleasure in life.
Working, for example, can bring about all kinds of rewards: There is, of course, 
the financial reward when you get paid for the work that you do. If colleagues or 
bosses at work tell you that you are doing a good job, then that brings emotional 
rewards, such as feelings of confidence and pride in your work, and a sense that you 
are liked and appreciated by others. All of those experiences will, of course, enhance 
your self-­esteem and feelings of self-­worth, which are even greater psychological 
rewards. Whether you have a job in an office, go to school, or carry out your primary 
responsibilities at home, the rewards you get from those responsibilities are at the 
core of your motivation to keep on fulfilling them.
What does this have to do with addiction recovery? you might ask. Think back to before 
you started drinking or using. What were the rewarding things in your life? Did they 
have to do with the pleasure you experienced from your important relationships with 
family, children, a partner, or friends? Were they connected to your hobbies? Your 
work? Now think about how your involvement in those rewarding activities changed 
as you started to drink or use more and more. When people become addicted to 
drugs or alcohol, pursuing the “natural” sources of rewards in life becomes less and 
less a part of the way that they spend their time. This is because of the increasing 
amount of time that becomes devoted to seeking drugs or alcohol, using them, and 
recovering from their effects (as in hangovers, crashing, depression, and the other 
uncomfortable withdrawal effects that come after the use).
Does this sound familiar? To relate this to your personal experience with addic­
tion, think about the things you started to do less of as your use of alcohol or drugs 
increased, and write them down in the space provided.

Step 6: Rediscover Rewards
153
Things I used to enjoy that I did less of as my drinking or drug use got out of control, 
for example: spending time with friends or family, exercising, or pursuing hobbies:




In recovery, it is not uncommon to feel like your sources of pleasure are limited 
without alcohol or drugs among your options. How will you spend your free time 
now? What can replace the role that drinking or using had in your life, and will it feel 
anywhere near as good? These are very normal and important questions that you 
might be wondering about, and it may take you some time and trial-­and-­error to 
figure out the answers. So be patient with yourself. The exercises you complete in this 
chapter will help you to find new ways to experience joy and pleasure in recovery.
Studies show not only that rewards relate to the development of addiction, but also 
that they’re very important in determining how successful people are at making changes 
to their alcohol or drug use once they enter recovery. According to what is known as 
behavioral economics theory, when people in addiction recovery have access to a range of 
sources of pleasure, joy, and satisfaction, they are more likely to quit drinking or using 
drugs successfully (Green and Kagel 1996; Higgins, Alessi, and Dantona 2002). This 
theory has a lot of scientific evidence behind it. For example, in one study that com­
pared two different types of behavioral treatments for addiction, the people with the 
most success in staying sober were those who got involved in a range of pleasurable 
activities and did them frequently. It didn’t matter what type of treatment they 
received—­the single most important thing that determined whether people were able 
to stay sober was their consistent involvement in a wide range of enjoyable activities. 
These activities replaced the time and energy they had been spending on addictive 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
154
behaviors, enabling them to experience pleasure without having to face the devastating 
consequences of alcohol or drug use (Farabee, Rawson, and McCann 2002).
Behavioral Activation in Addiction Recovery
As studies have continued to prove how important it is for addicts in recovery to find 
healthy ways of experiencing joy and fulfillment, a treatment approach that has been 
used to help people with depression to do this very thing has recently been applied to 
the treatment of addiction as well. This approach, called behavioral activation therapy, 
is focused on motivating people to get involved in pleasant activities on a regular 
basis (Daughters et al. 2008; Magidson et al. 2011).
Behavioral activation therapy has been found to be very helpful to people who 
struggle with depression, because depression can cause a loss of motivation to do 
enjoyable things (Cuijpers, Smit, and van Straten 2007; Mazzucchelli, Kane, and 
Rees 2009; Sturmey 2009). This becomes part of a vicious cycle: when people stop 
doing pleasurable things, their mood tends to get worse, which makes them more 
vulnerable to addictive behaviors; and as addictive behaviors take over, less and less 
time is devoted to doing enjoyable activities. Recent studies have shown that, when 
used to help people who struggle with both addiction and depression, Behavioral 
activation therapy helps them successfully quit their use of drugs and alcohol and 
improves symptoms of depression at the same time (Daughters et al. 2008; Magidson 
et al. 2011).
Bringing Pleasure into Recovery
As you begin to think about how you’d like to incorporate pleasant activities into 
your life, keep the following suggestions in mind. You’ll get to explore these sugges­
tions in more depth when you complete the exercises in this chapter:
•	 Be sure that you select activities carefully, so as not to choose something 
that may trigger a craving or a temptation.
•	 An important goal is to create a balance between things that you enjoy 
doing and things that you do to fulfill responsibilities. There is an impor­
tant difference between the two.

Step 6: Rediscover Rewards
155
•	 To increase your chances of actually getting around to doing pleasant activ­
ities, try scheduling them.
•	 When you schedule pleasant activities, consider what your most risky times 
of day are (in other words, when you are the most vulnerable to relapsing), 
and try to plan them during those times.
•	 Keep in mind that your assumptions about whether you’ll enjoy a particu­
lar activity may be wrong. In exercise 8.5 (Pleasure Predicting), you can 
explore this idea further and see how it applies to you.
Pleasant Activities vs. Risky Situations
Now that you are getting used to living a lifestyle that supports your recovery, you 
are going to learn to be thoughtful in new and different ways about the activities you 
choose to do. As you start to plan how you will spend your time, you might try asking 
yourself, before you decide to do something (such as going to a movie or a concert, or 
hanging out with certain friends): Is this something that might trigger me to want to drink 
or use? Sometimes, without realizing it, we can be drawn to certain activities that 
used to be associated with drinking or using. Let’s consider an example:
Daniel Gets Triggered
Daniel has been abstinent from using marijuana for five weeks now. His friend 
Holden calls him up and invites him to go to a concert featuring an artist Daniel 
has seen several times before and would love to see again. This is great, Daniel 
thinks to himself. I didn’t know what I was going to do tonight, and now I have something 
to occupy my time. What Daniel doesn’t realize is that both Holden and this concert 
are risky for his recovery. He used to smoke pot with Holden all the time, and he 
has never been to see this particular artist in concert when he wasn’t high. When 
he gets to the concert, he finds himself with a craving he rates as an 8 in intensity 
on a scale from 1 to 10. Holden has some weed, so Daniel ends up smoking with 
him that night.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
156
In this situation, Daniel was trying to find something pleasurable to do, but he 
didn’t make the link between the music he was going to listen to at the concert and 
his prior marijuana use. He also didn’t recognize how the cards were stacked against 
him with his friend Holden coming with him. While Daniel had quit five weeks ago 
and no longer had his own supply, Holden made it easy for him to access the 
marijuana.
Now, with the knowledge that he chose a risky situation when he intended to plan 
a pleasant activity, Daniel can think through how he might have planned to do things 
differently if he had asked himself the question, Could this concert trigger me to want to 
use? beforehand. If he had realized that Holden and the music itself could be triggers, 
there are a few ways he could have handled the situation differently:
•	 He could have avoided the concert completely. This would be the safest 
choice, especially in early recovery. At this stage, Daniel’s ability to resist 
temptations is likely at its weakest, and he hasn’t yet learned all of the 
coping strategies that he needs to have in place to take on something so 
risky.
•	 He could have gone to the concert, but not with Holden. One way of pro­
tecting himself from a potential relapse would be to find a supportive sober 
friend to go with him, and discuss a plan with that friend for how he would 
handle himself if he were to have a craving (for example, leave early, or tell 
the friend about it and talk it through).
Daniel’s example is included to give you a good sense of how to ask yourself the 
right questions about a planned activity so that you can learn to tell the difference 
between a healthy, pleasant activity and a risky situation. If you schedule your time 
in advance, and give thoughtful consideration to what you are planning, you can 
avoid placing yourself in a triggering situation.

Step 6: Rediscover Rewards
157
Exercise 8.1: Activity Tracking
The first step in developing a healthy, rewarding life is to get an accurate sense of how you are 
spending your time, and how your current activities relate to your mood and use of alcohol 
or drugs. To do this, using the form below, you are going to record all of your daily activities, 
including the ones that may seem unimportant (like watching TV). You don’t need to change 
the way you are doing anything just yet; you will brainstorm about how to make positive 
changes a little bit later in this chapter. For now, the tracking will help you to get a sense of 
your current patterns of activities, moods, and behaviors.
Using the activity tracking form works best when you fill out the form twice per day—­
once in the afternoon, and once in the evening. When you use this form, you will rate how 
much you enjoyed each activity, from 0 to 10, with 0 meaning it was not at all enjoyable and 
10 meaning it was extremely enjoyable. There is no “correct” rating for any activity; you are 
simply doing this to notice patterns. So, for example, if you spent the hour from 6:00 to 7:00 
cooking dinner, and you really did not enjoy it, you would rate it a 0 or a 1.
A “pleasant” or “enjoyable” activity is anything that you rate a 6 or higher. At the end of 
the day, you will add up how many pleasant activities (rated 6 or higher) you did, and you will 
rate your overall mood on that day on a scale from 0 to 10, with 0 meaning your mood was 
as low as it can get, and 10 meaning that your mood couldn’t have been better. You’ll also 
rate your most intense craving of the day from 1 to 10, with 1 meaning it was very mild and 
10 meaning that it was extremely strong. Finally, you’ll indicate whether or not you drank or 
used on that day. Complete this form on a daily basis for at least one week. You can down­
load fresh copies of it at http://www.newharbinger.com/32783.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
158
Activity Tracking Form
Day/Date: 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Time
Activity
Pleasure 
Rating (0–­10)
7:00–­8:00 a.m.
8:00–­9:00 a.m.
9:00–­10:00 a.m.
10:00–­11:00 a.m.
11:00–­12:00 p.m.
12:00–­1:00 p.m.
1:00–­2:00 p.m.
2:00–­3:00 p.m.

Step 6: Rediscover Rewards
159
3:00–­4:00 p.m.
4:00–­5:00 p.m.
5:00–­6:00 p.m.
6:00–­7:00 p.m.
7:00–­8:00 p.m.
8:00–­9:00 p.m.
9:00–­10:00 p.m.
Total pleasant activities (rated 6 or higher):              
Overall mood rating for today (0 to 10):              
Peak craving rating for today (1 to 10):              
Relapse:	
	
Yes	
	
No

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
160
The more frequently you track your activities, the better able you will be to rec­
ognize patterns that you might want to change. Using the previous form, you will 
start to see the connections between your moods and your activity level, both of 
which are related to your use of alcohol and drugs. People who do more pleasurable 
things tend to be happier, and the happiness makes them want to do more enjoyable 
things.
If you have a therapist or counselor, review your activity tracking form with him 
or her, and try to set some goals around the changes you’d like to make to it. If you 
don’t have a therapist or counselor, try to look for patterns: When you do more pleas­
ant activities, are your mood ratings any different? What about your cravings? Maybe 
the activities help both, or maybe only one. Either way, understanding how your 
activities relate to your mood and cravings is part of strengthening your skill set as a 
self expert. You can then make adjustments to your activities according to what your 
needs are on any given day.
Balancing “Should Dos” with “Want Tos”
As you are reading this chapter, you might find yourself thinking, I’m a pretty 
active person. I do a lot of stuff. Do I really need to do more? The answer to that depends. 
Are the things you are spending your time doing things that you are obligated to do, 
or are they things that you find enjoyable? The key is to have a balance between the 
two. Often the scale is tipped in the direction of lots of “should dos,” or activities that 
are part of your responsibilities. This can feel very unfulfilling, and can lead to guilt, 
confusion, or dissatisfaction with life. On the other hand, when people are doing a lot 
of pleasurable activities and not working on any long-­term goals, this can create a 
void, or a feeling of underachieving or not accomplishing enough. Let’s take a look at 
your personal balance of responsibility and fun, so that you can decide where you 
need to focus your efforts.

Step 6: Rediscover Rewards
161
Exercise 8.2: “Should Dos” and “Want Tos”
For this exercise, you are simply going to make a list of the things that you do to fulfill respon­
sibilities (your “should dos”) and the things that you do for fun (“want tos”), so that you can 
get a sense of how balanced they are.
Should Dos	 	
	
	
	
  Want Tos
1. 	 	
	
	
	
  	
	
  1. 
2. 	 	
	
	
  	
	
	
  2. 
3. 	 	
	
	
  	
	
	
  3. 
4. 	 	
	
	
  	
	
	
  4. 
5. 	 	
	
	
  	
	
	
  5. 
6. 	 	
	
	
  	
	
	
  6. 
7. 	 	
	
	
	
  	
	
  7. 
8. 		
	
	
  	
	
	
  8. 
9. 	 	
	
	
  	
	
	
  9. 
10. 	
	
	
	
  	
	
  10. 
What did you notice during this exercise? Was it hard for you to come up with 
things that you do for pleasure, or was it the other way around? Pay attention to 
where you see a gap in your activity balance, so that you can begin to brainstorm 
about ways to have satisfying numbers and types of activities in both categories.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
162
Exercise 8.3: Pleasant Activities
Ideally, you should have one pleasant activity worked into each day. It doesn’t have to take 
up a lot of time; it just needs to be something you do with the intention of enjoying yourself. In 
this next exercise, take a look at the list of pleasant activities and see if there is anything that 
you’d like to start or continue doing. Circle each one.
Go for a walk.
Cook something new.
Read something enjoyable.
Go to a museum.
Go to the zoo.
Take a dance class.
Go to the movies.
Spend time with a friend.
Go on a date.
Plan a trip somewhere.
Plan a party.
Go for a bike ride.
Go to the library.
Exercise.
Call someone you like.
Invite people over for dinner.
Eat out at a restaurant.
Do some gardening.
Draw something.
Plan and do an art project.
Listen to some music.
Play a sport you like.
Go to a sports event.
Watch something on TV.
Eat dessert.
Go hiking.
Make a bouquet of flowers.
Decorate part of your home.
Write a story.
Go to the theater.
Get a new haircut or hairdo.
Take a bath.
Go to a religious activity.
Sing a song.
Go to a park.
Play a musical instrument.
Meditate.
Spend time with family.
Get a massage.
Organize your photos.
Surf the Internet.
Skype with someone.
Have takeout and movie night.
Go to the beach.
Write a poem.
Do some journaling.
Make a gift for someone.
Go to an aquarium.
Go skating.
Do a puzzle.
Make jewelry.
Go to the mall.
Take a class.
Play with a pet.
Go bowling.
Do some volunteer work.
Take some photographs.

Step 6: Rediscover Rewards
163
Activities not listed in the Pleasant Events table that I would like to do:
1.	 
2.	 
3.	 
4.	 
5.	 
6.	 
Exercise 8.4: Activity Scheduling
Now that you have identified some new activities you’d like to do, the next step is to plan 
when to do them. Then, be sure to continue tracking your activities throughout the day, so 
that you can keep tabs on how you’re balancing Should Dos and Want Tos.
Activity I plan to do:	
	
	
	
	
Date I plan to do it, or start it:
Activity #1 (	 	
	
	
	
	
)	
Date:
Activity #2 (	 	
	
	
	
	
)	
Date:
Activity #3 (	 	
	
	
	
	
)	
Date:
Activity #4 (	 	
	
	
	
	
)	
Date:

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
164
Activity #5 (	 	
	
	
	
	
)	
Date:
Activity #6 (	 	
	
	
	
	
)	
Date:
Activity #7 (	 	
	
	
	
	
)	
Date:
Activity #8 (	 	
	
	
	
	
)	
Date:
Activity #9 (	 	
	
	
	
	
)	
Date:
Activity #10 (	 	
	
	
	
	
)	
Date:
When Things Get in the Way
Sometimes, things just get in the way of our doing things for fun. It could be a 
practical problem, like figuring out who will watch the kids or walk the dog, or how 
to free up your busy schedule. For this reason, scheduling activities in advance can 
be helpful, because it will lead you to plan for these kinds of obstacles. Looking at the 
list of pleasant activities that you planned in the previous exercise, take a few moments 
to think about potential barriers, or things that might prevent you from doing one or 
more of them despite your best intentions. Make a list of these obstacles below.
OBSTACLES TO PLEASANT ACTIVITIES:
1.	 
2.	 
3.	 
4.	 

Step 6: Rediscover Rewards
165
Now, for each of the obstacles that you listed, there is a three-­step process you can 
follow to find a realistic solution:
•	 First: brainstorm a list of all of the possible solutions that you can think of.
•	 Second: think about the pros and cons of each of the solutions, and narrow 
it down to the best one or two approaches.
•	 Third: try one of the best approaches, and see how well it works to free you 
up or otherwise enable you to do the pleasant activity.
Let’s practice this now, with the first barrier that you identified.
Barrier #1: 
Step 1: Here are all of the possible solutions I can think of for this problem:
1.	 
2.	 
3.	 
4.	 
5.	 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
166
Step 2: These are the pros and cons of each of the possible solutions:
Solution #
Pros
Cons
1
2
3
4
5
Step 3: Pick the best two solutions:
1.	 
2.	 

Step 6: Rediscover Rewards
167
Once you’ve tried one or both of these, evaluate how well they worked, so that you 
can decide which solution you’d like to use again in the future.
In addition to practical obstacles, our thoughts can sometimes run interference 
with doing pleasant activities. Often we think that we won’t enjoy something because 
we are too tired, or we’re not in a good mood, or we just don’t feel like doing any­
thing. But sometimes we are wrong. Remember how we worked on recognizing cogni­
tive distortions in chapter 5? We are going to revisit cognitive distortions, specifically 
as they relate to pleasant activities, here.
Negative moods can affect our expectations about how much we can enjoy things. 
That is, if your mood isn’t great, you probably don’t expect that going out for dinner 
or being with other people is going to be enjoyable, simply because you don’t feel like 
it. But the reality can be quite different from what you expected, because the activity 
itself can change your mood. Below are a few examples of thoughts that can get in the 
way of getting out and doing something fun:
•	 I don’t feel like it.
•	 It won’t be any fun.
•	 I’m just going to want to leave and go home.
•	 It will be a waste of time.
•	 I’m going to ruin everyone else’s fun with my bad mood.
Do any of these thoughts sound familiar? If not, then perhaps negative thoughts 
are not such a big barrier for you personally. If they are familiar, you should know 
that these are very common ways of thinking, and there is a way that you can change 
these thoughts, just as you’ve learned to change some of your irrational ways of 
thinking about drinking or using. Below you will be introduced to a technique that 
will help you learn how to challenge your thoughts about pleasant activities.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
168
Exercise 8.5: Pleasure Predicting
As you are learning, our thoughts and feelings about activities can be very misleading at 
times. The idea behind pleasure predicting is that we can act like scientists, examining our 
negative thoughts and expectations about activities and gathering evidence to see whether 
or not they turn out to be accurate. According to this approach, just because you don’t feel 
like doing something doesn’t mean that it isn’t worth doing. You can choose to do something 
and then decide whether it was enjoyable, based on your observations about your thoughts 
and your mood during and after the activity. Here’s how to do it:
•	 First, when you’re planning to do an activity, before you do it, write down how much 
you expect to enjoy it, using a percentage from 0 to 100, with 0 meaning that you 
don’t expect to enjoy it all, 50 percent meaning that you think you will enjoy it mod­
erately, and 100 percent meaning that you expect that you will enjoy it to the fullest 
extent possible. Pay attention to any other thoughts you are having about the activity 
and write them down.
•	 Then, do the activity, even if you rated it a 0. Without this step, you can’t do pleasure 
predicting!
•	 During the activity, pay attention to any thoughts you are having about it and jot them 
down.
•	 After you finish the activity, rate how much you actually enjoyed it, from 0 to 100 
percent.
•	 Compare the enjoyment ratings from before and after you did the activity. These plea­
sure ratings might be different, or they might not be; either way, it’s okay. The idea is 
to be an objective observer of your experience and begin to identify patterns.

Step 6: Rediscover Rewards
169
Exercise 8.6: Pleasure Predicting Form
Pleasant Activity
Pleasure 
Prediction 
Rating 
Before 
(0 to 100%)
Pleasure 
Rating 
After 
(0 to 100%)
Thoughts Before and During 
the Activity

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
170
What did you notice about your ratings before and after the activities? In some 
cases, you might find that while you approach certain activities with a sense of dread, 
or with low expectations about how much fun you will have, you get more enjoyment 
out of them than you expect. These are, of course, the types of activities that you’ll 
want to repeat, and you can remind yourself of how your predictions might have been 
more about your mood than about the activity itself. In other situations, you might 
find that the activity was just as you expected it to be.
Remember that in recovery, you are going to be redefining the way that you spend 
your time, and an important part of this will involve figuring out what kinds of 
things you can enjoy without feeling triggered to drink or use. The things you enjoy 
that are not risky for you now may not be the same things that were pleasurable and 
safe for you when you were actively drinking or using. If you look at pleasure predict­
ing as a process of discovery, you can find ways to experience joy and fun in recovery, 
which will help you stay healthy and sober.
Exercise 8.7: Reward Yourself for Scheduling and 
Following Through
Now that you have some experience with pleasure predicting, you might have some activi­
ties in mind that you’d like to repeat, because you found that you enjoyed them. Scheduling 
activities helps to make it more likely that you’ll follow through, because you’ve already com­
mitted to it and worked your way through any barriers in terms of scheduling. To take it a 
step further, after you do an activity that you planned and committed to, you should reward 
yourself for following through, just as you did in chapter 4 when you worked on incorporating 
physical exercise into your routine. In this exercise, you will schedule your next few activities 
for the coming week, and plan how you will reward yourself afterward.

Step 6: Rediscover Rewards
171
Week: 	
	
	
	
This week, I will do the following activities:
1.	 I will 	
	
	
	
	
	
 (activity) on 
 (date), 
and I will reward myself by 
.
2.	 I will 	
	
	
	
	
	
 (activity) on 
 (date), 
and I will reward myself by 
.
3.	 I will 	
	
	
	
	
	
 (activity) on 
 (date), 
and I will reward myself by 
.
Wrap-­up
In this chapter you learned about how you can reintroduce pleasurable activities into 
your life in a way that is compatible with your recovery. Finding balance between 
work and fun is a lifelong practice. Things aren’t always in perfect balance; there will 
be times when you find yourself doing more work and fulfilling responsibilities, with 
less time for fun, and other times when you have a little more free time on your 
hands. With continued awareness of your goal to keep things in balance as much as 
possible, you will get better and better at it, and this will serve your recovery well. 
The more joy and pleasure you come to derive from relationships, hobbies, and other 
activities, the less you will miss the presence of alcohol or drugs in your life.


CHAPTER 9
Step 7: Conquer 
Challenging Emotions
N
ow that you have some helpful strategies for coping with cravings, you will 
need skills on board for dealing with some of the other unpleasant feelings 
that are common in recovery, such as anxiety, sadness, and anger. Most of 
the CBT, mindfulness, and motivational techniques you’ve already learned can actu­
ally help you with these types of emotions. To mobilize these “go-­to” skills in a dif­
ferent way, we will review how you can use them when negative feelings come up.
You will face your share of ups and downs in this new phase of your life. Getting 
equipped to anticipate and cope with them without relapsing will be the focus of this 
chapter.
Managing Your Mood
More often than not, addictions go hand in hand with other psychological problems. 
Studies show that as many as two-­thirds of people with addictions have mental health 
issues, the most common of which are anxiety and mood disorders, such as depres­
sion (Glasner-­Edwards et al. 2009). This is not surprising, right? It makes sense that 
alcohol or other substances could become a sort of “refuge” for dealing with unpleas­
ant emotions or symptoms.
By now, if you are someone who used to self-­medicate your depression or anxiety 
by drinking or using, you’ve probably learned that in the long run, alcohol and drugs 
are not the most effective antidepressants. In fact, they make depression and anxiety 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
174
worse over time. But at the time when you started using them that way, they proba­
bly made pretty good Band-­Aids. To avoid falling back into the trap of drinking or 
using as a Band-­Aid for negative emotions, you can use the following techniques, 
which you’ve already practiced for coping with cravings: (1) monitoring and challeng­
ing negative thoughts that lead to triggering emotions, (2) revisiting your motivation 
to remain abstinent, (3) engaging in pleasant activities and other behavioral coping 
strategies, and (4) using mindfulness-­based coping skills. We will briefly review how 
to apply each of these approaches to coping with negative moods below.
Know Your Negative Emotional Triggers
Back in chapter 5, you completed an exercise on identifying your internal triggers. 
Those emotional triggers may have included depression, anxiety, anger, jealousy, irri­
tability, boredom, rejection, frustration, guilt or shame, or feeling overwhelmed. Turn 
back to that exercise (5.1) and review your internal emotional triggers. If you can be 
one step ahead of these triggers—­meaning that you are able to recognize when the 
emotions are coming on, before they’re full-blown and driving you into relapse 
mode—­then you can stay ahead in your recovery, preventing a relapse before the trig­
gering events can lead you there.
Mood Monitoring
We all feel down sometimes. In early recovery in particular, it is very common to 
feel sad or depressed on and off for a period of time. This can often be explained by 
the withdrawal syndrome—­in other words, the effects of alcohol or drugs leaving 
your body. After a month or longer of abstinence from drug or alcohol use, these 
symptoms may resolve themselves. In some people, however, those depressed feelings 
persist for longer, and may require additional treatment using medications or therapy.
If you find that you have lingering depression symptoms, it is important to get 
them evaluated and properly treated, as they can lower your chances of success in 
addiction recovery if they are not managed (Glasner-­Edwards et al. 2009). A list of 
common symptoms of depression follows; if a few of these persist for longer than a 
month after you’ve gotten sober, you should consult a professional for evaluation and 
possible treatment recommendations.

Step 7: Conquer Challenging Emotions
175
DEPRESSION SYMPTOMS
•	 Sadness
•	 Feeling unable to enjoy things that used to bring you pleasure
•	 Crying spells
•	 Low energy
•	 Feeling restless
•	 Sleep problems (either inability to sleep or sleeping more than usual)
•	 Changes in appetite (either increase or decrease)
•	 Loss of energy
•	 Problems with concentration
•	 Difficulty making everyday decisions (like what to wear or what to eat)
•	 Feelings of worthlessness
•	 Feelings of hopelessness
•	 Thoughts about death or dying, or suicidal thoughts
Cognitive Distortions That Lead to Depression 
and Anxiety
In chapter 6, you took an in-­depth look at cognitive distortions that lead to red 
flag thoughts. As it turns out, these same categories of distortions can lead you to 
think in ways that fuel sadness and anxiety. Below, you’ll find examples of anxious 
and depressing thoughts in each of the categories of irrational thoughts that you 
learned about in chapter 6.
•	 Black-­or-­white thinking: When you think of things this way, you see 
things as all good or all bad. For example: My date canceled for Saturday night. 
I’m always going to be alone.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
176
•	 Discounting the positive: When you ignore or devalue the positive aspects 
of a situation, you end up paying attention only to the potential negatives. 
For example: My friend probably only complimented my outfit because she feels 
sorry for me. I know I look awful.
•	 Jumping to conclusions: Just as it sounds, this distortion happens when 
you make assumptions about a person or situation without any evidence to 
support them. One type of distorted thought in this category is fortune 
telling, or making assumptions about what will happen in the future. For 
example: I’m not going to get that job. It won’t work out for me, just like everything 
else I try.
•	 Taking your feelings too seriously: This mistake in thinking happens 
when you take a feeling you’re having in the moment and assume that it is 
a true reflection of your reality. For example: I don’t feel like I can enjoy any­
thing. I’m just going to live my life in misery.
•	 Self-­blame: This cognitive distortion occurs when you assume an excessive 
amount of blame for your problems. For example: I created my own problems 
by making so many bad decisions about drinking and using. My depression is my own 
fault.
•	 Labeling: When you use a negative label to describe yourself, it fuels nega­
tive moods. For example: Only losers like me need treatment for an addiction. I 
was too weak to keep it under control.
Although there are other types of cognitive distortions, these examples should 
give you a sense of the types of thoughts linked with depression and anxiety that fit 
into the various categories of mistakes in thinking. In this next exercise, you are 
going to begin tracking your own emotionally triggering thoughts, and monitoring 
how they relate to your cravings for alcohol or drugs.
Exercise 9.1: Mood and Craving Log
To begin to understand what types of thoughts may trigger you to feel sad or depressed, 
complete the following log, including the specific thoughts, along with a depression rating 

Step 7: Conquer Challenging Emotions
177
from 1 to 10—­with 1 meaning very slightly depressed, and 10 being the most depressed. 
Also complete a craving rating from 0 to 10, representing your overall level of cravings for 
alcohol or drugs on that same day.
Date
Situation
Thought
Depression 
Rating 
(0–­10)
Craving 
Rating 
(0–­10)

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
178
Now that you’ve had some experience with rating your moods and cravings, can 
you see a connection between them? Do you tend to have stronger cravings on days 
when you have more frequent depressing thoughts? Or is it when you have a higher 
depression rating (when the thoughts affect your mood more negatively)? Are there 
themes or situations that are coming up repeatedly that trigger depressing thoughts? 
Just take notice of these patterns as a way of deepening your self-­understanding. 
Continue to complete these ratings for at least a few weeks using this form, which is 
available at http://www.newharbinger.com/32783. Knowing what makes you depressed 
and how this relates to urges to drink or use will help you to anticipate urges on a 
down day and put some of your new coping skills to use to get you through it without 
relapsing.
Anxiety Monitoring
As you are learning more about the mood symptoms that may make you vulner­
able to relapse, it might help you to know that mood and anxiety symptoms often go 
hand in hand. That is, most people who suffer from depression also experience some 
level of anxiety. There are different types of anxiety disorders; the most common 
types that overlap with addiction are reviewed briefly below:
•	 Generalized anxiety disorder: People with this problem are chronic wor­
riers. If you have generalized anxiety disorder, you worry about a lot of 
things, down to everyday decisions, and you have a hard time turning the 
worry off. Along with your worried thoughts, you experience anxiety symp­
toms such as fatigue, tension, irritability, or nausea. Other symptoms may 
also be present.
•	 Social anxiety disorder: If you have social anxiety, it means that you get 
very nervous when you are going to be around other people (whether social­
izing, meeting new people, or speaking in front of others at work or in 
another setting). This form of anxiety often stems from feeling self-­
conscious about how others will view or judge you. Your self-­consciousness 
is so anxiety provoking that it leads to very uncomfortable symptoms, like 
shortness of breath, sweating, heart palpitations, nausea, dizziness, or other 
symptoms.

Step 7: Conquer Challenging Emotions
179
•	 Panic attacks or panic disorder: Panic attacks involve a sudden rush of 
intense fear that occurs completely out of the blue, along with anxiety 
symptoms including shortness of breath; sweating; feeling faint; heart 
racing; nausea; or fear of losing control, going crazy, or dying. When you 
have repeated panic attacks and begin to fear them, you can develop panic 
disorder.
•	 Post-­traumatic stress disorder: This anxiety disorder can develop in 
someone who has been exposed to a traumatic event. This event could 
involve witnessing or experiencing a life-­threatening situation or a natural 
disaster, and in that situation feeling very helpless or horrified. In some 
people, these experiences lead to anxiety symptoms that may include 
feeling numb, having nightmares or flashbacks, feeling depressed or hope­
less about the future, having trouble connecting emotionally with others, 
or avoiding things that remind them of the traumatic event.
If you think that you may suffer from any of these problems, it is advisable for you 
to get evaluated by a mental health professional to confirm a diagnosis and consider 
some treatment recommendations. You may find, though, that you have some symp­
toms of worry, anxiety, or panic even if it is not a diagnosable disorder. These symp­
toms could worsen temporarily in early recovery, as alcohol or drugs leave your body 
and you begin to experience some of the emotions that you might have been sup­
pressing while you were drinking or using. With the log below, you can start record­
ing your anxious thoughts, just as you did for your depression, to get a sense of how 
frequently they are happening, what situations they are linked to, and how they 
might relate to your cravings or urges to use.
Exercise 9.2: Anxiety and Craving Log
To begin to understand what types of thoughts may trigger you to feel anxious, complete 
the following log, including thoughts that make you feel anxious or nervous, along with an 
anxiety rating from 1 to 10, with 1 meaning very slightly anxious, and 10 being the most 
anxious you’ve felt. Also complete a craving rating from 0 to 10, representing your overall 
level of cravings for alcohol or drugs on that same day.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
180
Date
Situation
Thought
Anxiety 
Rating 
(0–­10)
Craving 
Rating 
(0–­10)

Step 7: Conquer Challenging Emotions
181
Just as you did with your log of depressing thoughts, take a look at your responses 
here and look for patterns. How do your anxious thoughts relate to your cravings for 
alcohol or drugs? Do you notice any themes or situations that are common to many 
of your anxious thoughts? Use this exercise to continue to build your self expertise. 
Do you need to read up more on anxiety and how to manage it? Or are depressing 
thoughts more of an issue for you? Understanding the emotions that you experience 
that make you the most vulnerable will empower you in your healing process. If you 
are currently in counseling or therapy, you can review these exercises with your coun­
selor or therapist.
Challenging Negative Thoughts
Earlier in this workbook, you learned to challenge red flag thoughts using the 
three T’s: (1) identifying the triggering situation, (2) describing the thought, and (3) 
placing the thought on trial. You can use the same strategy to challenge negative, 
depressing, or anxious thinking—what we’ll call dysfunctional thoughts. Let’s con­
sider Alicia’s example:
Alicia’s Negative Thinking
Alicia has been sober from alcohol for nearly a month. She is invited to a work 
party at a restaurant with a bar, where she knows that many of her colleagues will 
be drinking and dancing. Alicia decides to invite Vince, a new love interest of hers 
who is also sober. She and Vince have been out for coffee together a few times, on 
his invitation, but this is the first time Alicia has asked him out. He enthusiastically 
accepts her invitation, but then, on the day before the party, he tells her that he got 
called in to work on a project and he won’t be able to make it. He apologizes and 
asks her if she’d like to go out for dinner another night, after his project is 
completed. Alicia feels very hurt and rejected. She thinks, I was probably completely 
wrong about him. I have nothing going for me. I’m sure Vince only said yes in the first place 
because he feels sorry for me. I’m always going to be alone.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
182
In the past, Alicia would have wound up going to the party and drinking as a 
result of these types of depressive and anxious thoughts, but this time she tries 
thought challenging, using the three T’s:
Triggering situation: feeling rejected when Vince cancelled plans to go to the 
party with her
Dysfunctional thoughts: I have nothing going for me, I’m sure Vince only said yes in 
the first place because he feels sorry for me. I’m always going to be alone.
Thoughts on trial: Alicia examines the evidence that Vince didn’t really want to go 
with her to the party:
Questions to Ask to 
Examine the Evidence
The Facts
What evidence is there that 
Vince only said yes because 
he felt sorry for me?
None, really. He said yes pretty enthusiastically.
Is there any evidence that 
Vince actually likes me and 
wanted to go with me?
Yes. First of all, we’ve been out before, and Vince was the 
one who initiated those coffee dates every time we’ve been 
out so far. Second, when he canceled, he actually followed 
up immediately with an alternative plan, to go out to 
dinner with me.
Is it true that I have 
nothing going for me?
Well, I’d like to have more going for me, but right now 
there are a few very good things I have going: I’m sober, 
I have a job, and I’m very connected with my family.
Is there evidence that I’m 
always going to be alone?
I am fortune telling. I don’t really know if I am going to be 
alone or not. I have had several relationships, and even 
though they haven’t worked out, I haven’t been alone for 
most of my life. Also, whether or not I am in a romantic 
relationship, I am not truly alone. I do have family and 
friends, although I really would like to have a romantic 
partner in my future.

Step 7: Conquer Challenging Emotions
183
Now that Alicia has considered her thoughts using the three T’s, she can see that 
she made a few mistakes in thinking: she was discounting the positive when she told 
herself that Vince was just feeling sorry for her; she was using black-­or-­white thinking 
when she told herself that she had nothing going for herself, and she was jumping to 
conclusions when she thought that she would always be alone. In the right hand column, 
titled “The Facts,” Alicia successfully challenged and replaced her negative thoughts 
with more rational thinking.
In this next exercise, you can practice challenging some of your own depressed or 
anxious thoughts using the three T’s.
Exercise 9.3: Challenging Your Negative Thoughts
In this exercise, you are going to think about two recent situations in which you felt depressed 
or anxious, and describe them. For each situation, you will write down the negative thought 
that went through your mind, along with the emotion that you felt. After you identify the 
thought error you made, you will practice the three T’s of thought challenging. You can refer 
back to Exercise 6.1 to refresh your memory about how you did this when you were working 
on your red flag thoughts.
Situation #1:  
Negative thoughts and emotions that the thoughts led to:

Thoughts on trial:  

Evidence that the thoughts are accurate:  



The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
184
Evidence that the thoughts are not accurate:  


Response (What can you tell yourself to see the situation more realistically?):



Situation #2:  
Negative thoughts and emotions that the thoughts led to:

Thoughts on trial:  

Evidence that the thoughts are accurate:  



Step 7: Conquer Challenging Emotions
185
Evidence that the thoughts are not accurate:  


Response (What can you tell yourself to see the situation more realistically?):



Managing Anger
Do you ever find yourself losing your cool when you’re angry? Most of us do, at 
one time or another. If this is a frequent experience for you, and if anger is one of 
your relapse triggers, then having some healthy coping tools and outlets for it is going 
to come in really handy for you as you work toward your recovery.
One of the most important things to keep in mind is that there are many disad­
vantages to losing your temper, aside from how it feels and the potential for relapse 
that it brings. When you raise your voice or otherwise act out aggressively in anger:
•	 You appear out of control.
•	 People don’t respect or take seriously what you are saying.
•	 You don’t get your needs met.
•	 You lose self-­respect.
The first step to getting a handle on your anger is to understand how it feels, so 
that you can anticipate when it’s coming on. Take a moment and think about how 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
186
you experience anger. Where do you feel it in your body? What kinds of thoughts go 
through your head when you are feeling angry? Jot down some notes about it below.
When I am angry:
These are the physical sensations I experience:  



These are some of the thoughts that frequently go through my mind:




These are some of the ways that I express it when I can’t control it:





Step 7: Conquer Challenging Emotions
187
The next step to learning how to effectively manage anger is to figure out what 
triggers it. In the exercise that follows, you are going to identify your anger triggers. 
First, let’s look at an example of how uncontrollable anger can unfold and create 
unwanted consequences.
Jenny Gets Angry
Jenny has been sober from alcohol for six weeks. She and her husband have been in 
some conflict recently about the division of responsibilities between them. On 
Saturday, their son Sammy has basketball practice at two o’clock. Jenny wants to 
get together with some friends around one o’clock and she tells her husband that he 
needs to take Sammy to practice. He refuses, saying that he has things to do. He 
leaves the house before she can get a word in edgewise. Jenny is enraged. Thoughts 
are racing through her head. He has no respect for me, or my time! If he keeps this up I will 
never have a life. I’m going to let him have it! Unable to reach him, she leaves him a very 
angry, screaming voice mail. Her son, after witnessing all of this, says, “Mommy, 
why are you so mad at Dad? You don’t like going with me to basketball?” Jenny 
feels very guilty and ashamed of her behavior. Suddenly she finds herself 
experiencing a very strong craving for alcohol.
Thinking about Jenny’s situation, you can probably see the various consequences 
of her inability to control her anger. She felt out of control; she reacted toward her 
husband in a way that probably did not resolve anything; and in the process, she 
unintentionally hurt her son’s feelings and modeled poor anger control. She ended up 
feeling ashamed, and this affected her recovery by setting her up for a strong alcohol 
craving.
Exercise 9.4: Anger Triggers
Identifying your personal anger triggers is the first step toward learning how to cope with 
anger more effectively. Usually, anger triggers fall into one of five categories:
•	 People (such as Jenny’s husband)

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
188
•	 Places (such as the car, if you’re someone who experiences frustration and anger 
management problems on the road)
•	 Feelings (such as feeling rejected, ignored, restless, or impatient)
•	 Thoughts (such as thoughts about the inefficiency of other people—­for example, Why 
is this line taking so long? I have somewhere to be!)
•	 Physical sensations (such as physical discomfort from alcohol or drug withdrawal, 
which can create irritability and anger)
Write down your anger triggers in each of these categories below:
People:




Places:





Step 7: Conquer Challenging Emotions
189
Thoughts:




Feelings:




Physical sensations:





The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
190
Give It a Beat
Now that you are aware of your personal anger triggers, you need to learn to give it a 
beat—to take a few moments to calm down when you feel angry and think about 
next steps. You don’t need to react on impulse or “take the bait” from someone who 
says or does something that provokes you to feel angry. Instead, you can choose to 
remain in control, rise above it, and cope with it in such a way that you will be able 
to look back and think, I’m proud of the way I handled that. This doesn’t mean that you 
shouldn’t feel angry. Anger control is not about preventing the experience of anger; it 
is about controlling your response to it. Here are some coping strategies that you can 
try when you give it a beat:
•	 Have an inner dialogue about it before you decide how to respond. 
Try telling yourself one of the following phrases—­whichever is the most 
helpful to you:
•	 I can keep my cool and remain in control of myself.
•	 It’s up to me to remain in control. I know I can do it.
•	 I can stay relaxed and get through this in a way that I can feel good about in the 
end.
•	 I can’t control how other people act and feel. Even if the actions of others upset me, 
I can only control my own behavior.
•	 Be assertive. Tell the other person that you’re feeling upset and you need 
some time to gather your thoughts and feelings before you can talk about 
it.
•	 Leave the situation. Just as you may have to leave a triggering situation in 
which you are vulnerable to relapse, if your anger is triggered and you’re 
concerned that you might not be able to control it, leaving the situation is 
a perfectly reasonable coping strategy.
•	 Focus on your breath. Relaxation and meditation strategies can be very 
helpful to bring your nervous system back into rhythm when you are feeling 
worked up.
•	 Count to ten. This can buy you the time that you need to calm yourself 
down so you don’t react in an out-of-control or impulsive manner.

Step 7: Conquer Challenging Emotions
191
•	 Allow yourself to cry. If you need an emotional outlet, give yourself the 
space and permission to do that. Crying is much healthier than lashing out 
in anger at someone else.
When you’ve calmed yourself down in the moment, then you can begin to think 
about how you can challenge angry thoughts. Use the assertive communication skills 
that you practiced in chapter 4 to communicate about the situation that made you 
angry in an effective manner that enables you to get your needs met.
Coming back to Jenny’s situation, let’s take a look at how she might challenge her 
angry thoughts by considering the consequences of her behavior and coming up with 
an inner dialogue that can help to lessen her angry feelings:
Triggering situation: Feeling that her needs were ignored by her husband. He refused 
to take Sammy to basketball practice, which made her unable to carry out her social 
plans.
Angry thoughts: He has no respect for me, or my time! If he keeps this up I will never have a 
life. I’m going to let him have it!
Alternative responses:
•	 It’s understandable that I’m angry; he knows that disregarding my requests like that 
gets me worked up. But I won’t let myself hang on to anger because of him.
•	 I’ll discuss a way to plan our weekends in advance when he comes home and I’ve 
cooled down.
•	 I’m going to make the best of the afternoon and take Sammy for ice cream after bas­
ketball practice.
•	 I’m going to apologize to Sammy for losing my cool like that and try to talk with him 
about healthier ways to express anger, so I can still set a good example.
•	 I know that it’s okay to feel anger, but I’m going to do a mindfulness breathing medita­
tion for five or ten minutes now, until I feel calmer.
Using any of these alternative responses will help Jenny to feel less angry and to 
build confidence in her ability to manage anger as it comes up. In this next exercise, 
you will give some thought to your own anger and how you can plan to respond to 
angry feelings differently.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
192
Exercise 9.5: Changing Angry Behavior
In this exercise, you will think about a time when you were angry and reacted to your anger 
in ways that were unhelpful. You will then come up with some alternative responses that you 
could have used. Thinking this through can prepare you to use healthier strategies the next 
time you feel angry.
When I felt angry…
The trigger was: 
These thoughts went through my mind:




My unhealthy responses were:  




Step 7: Conquer Challenging Emotions
193
Some alternative, healthier responses might have been:




Coping with Negative Emotions
So far in this chapter, you’ve been practicing cognitive strategies for managing 
negative emotions—­namely, identifying and challenging the thoughts that lead to 
them. This can be a very effective approach. But sometimes, for various reasons, a 
behavioral technique (in other words, doing something therapeutic rather than think­
ing your way through it) or a less time-­intensive cognitive technique (like saying a 
quick reassuring phrase to yourself) may be a better choice for you. Here, we review 
a range of therapeutic strategies that you can try in the face of any negative feeling 
that might be triggering for you, whether it’s anger, sadness, guilt, shame, anxiety, or 
another emotion.
•	 Try using the five-­minute SOBER breathing exercise that you learned in 
chapter 7.
•	 Do something that relaxes you. A few ideas:
•	 Focus on your breathing for a few minutes.
•	 Go for a walk.
•	 Take a bath.
•	 Listen to some music.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
194
•	 Try doing one of the pleasant activities you identified in exercise 8.3, in 
chapter 8. Remember that pleasant activities have a positive impact on 
your mood.
•	 Exercise. This can be a great outlet for negative emotions and the nervous 
energy that you might feel when you are worked up.
•	 Call someone you feel comfortable talking to. You don’t even have to talk 
about what’s bothering you if you don’t want to. Sometimes just hearing 
the sound of a supportive voice can get you through a tough moment.
•	 Go to a self-­help meeting.
•	 Say something reassuring to yourself. A lot of the time what gets and keeps 
us anxious or down is the feeling that we can’t cope with things when they 
get to a certain point. But this isn’t necessarily true. Try telling yourself:
•	 I can get through this.
•	 I can handle this.
•	 I can cope with whatever life sends my way.
•	 I’ve made it this far; I just need to take things one day at a time, one moment at 
a time.
•	 I don’t have to say or do anything about how I am feeling right now. I can just get 
through this moment, and figure out what to do later.
•	 Give yourself some credit. You are working your way through a difficult 
moment or day without drinking or using. You’re using your intention to 
get through this in a healthy way to prevent yourself from spiraling into a 
relapse or reacting in some other self-­destructive way that would make 
matters worse for yourself.
•	 Practice mindful acceptance. Sometimes, when circumstances that are 
upsetting to you are out of your control, entering a mode of acceptance can 

Step 7: Conquer Challenging Emotions
195
be the most therapeutic approach. Here are some things that you can tell 
yourself to find your way to acceptance:
•	 This is just how it is right now.
•	 Even though I don’t like this, I can tolerate it.
•	 I’m not going to judge the way I’m feeling. This is my experience. Maybe I can 
learn something from it.
Revisit Your Motivation
No matter what it is that triggers an urge to drink or use, reminding yourself of 
the reasons that you are working so hard to stay sober can be a very effective tool to 
keep you on track with your recovery goals. This is no different when it comes to 
negative emotions. Go back to exercise 3.2 in chapter 3, Resolving Your Ambivalence, 
in which you explored the benefits and drawbacks of quitting versus continuing to 
drink or use. If you completed this exercise thoroughly, you should see something 
about relief from depression, anxiety, or any other triggering negative emotion for you 
as one of the benefits of continuing to drink or use. Now take a look at the drawbacks 
you listed of continuing to drink or use, along with the benefits of quitting. Any time 
you feel tempted by a negative emotion, you can revisit this exercise. After you’ve 
thought carefully about your reasons for quitting, then rate your motivation for sobri­
ety on a scale from 0 to 10, with zero meaning that you are not motivated at all, and 
10 meaning that you are as motivated as you can possibly be.
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10
Not Motivated 
Somewhat Motivated 
Motivated 
Highly Motivated
Wherever you are on the scale, ask yourself what it would take to move one point 
higher. Keeping your motivation strong—­partly by reminding yourself of the reasons 
you are going to all of this trouble to stay sober—­will help you resist the temptation 
to drink or use when you are feeling down.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
196
Wrap-­up
Studies show that negative emotions are among the most common relapse triggers. 
The great news is, the most useful techniques for coping with negative emotions are 
the same as those that you’ve been using to cope with cravings to drink or use—­such 
as challenging your thoughts, practicing mindfulness, learning acceptance, and engag­
ing in pleasant activities. Now you just need to apply these strategies to your negative 
thoughts and feelings, as you’ve been practicing by using the exercises in this chapter.
By this point you’ve learned all of the essential skills that you need to manage the 
road to recovery. In the next and last chapter of this book, putting all of your hard 
work together, you will reflect on all that you’ve learned and—­based on what you’ve 
observed to be the most helpful strategies—­you will put together an integrated, per­
sonalized relapse prevention plan that you can use going forward in your recovery 
process.

CHAPTER 10
Your Personalized 
Recovery Plan
Y
ou’ve come a long way since you started this workbook. You have been prac­
ticing a lot of skills to help keep you sober and to pave the way to find happi­
ness, pleasure, and emotional balance in your recovery. You understand the 
way your addicted brain works. You’ve strengthened your rational brain repeatedly 
with CBT skills, mindfulness training, motivational exercises, new sources of pleasure 
to replace drugs and alcohol, and a deeper understanding of how your unique relapse 
triggers lead you to drink or use. In this chapter, we’re going to put all of the skills 
you’ve learned together into a personalized recovery plan that will help you stay 
happy, healthy, and sober in the long term.
There are a few ways that you will use the skills you’ve learned to prepare for long-­
term recovery. First, you will need to be aware of your personal warning signs for 
relapse, and be prepared with a plan for what to do if you or someone close to you 
begins to notice these signs becoming apparent. Second, although the hope is that 
you won’t slip or relapse, given that most people who are in recovery do at one time 
or another, you will need to prepare for how to handle a slip, to prevent it from 
turning into a full-­blown relapse. Finally, putting all of your hard work together, you 
will reflect on all that you’ve learned in this workbook and, based on what you’ve 
observed to be the most helpful strategies, you will put together an integrated, per­
sonalized relapse prevention plan that you can use going forward in your recovery 
process.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
198
Staying One Step Ahead of a Relapse
The great news about where you are now, compared to when you started this work­
book, is that you know exactly what triggers you and makes you vulnerable. Equipped 
with this knowledge, you’re less likely to be blindsided by an urge to drink or use. You 
just have to pay attention to what’s coming up ahead.
For at least the first six months of your recovery, one of the best ways to stay 
ahead of a potential relapse is to sit down at the start of each week and take the time 
to think about the days ahead. Do you know of any risky or potentially stressful situ­
ations coming up? (These could be family-­related, work-­related, or other situations 
that might result in the urge to drink or use.) If so, you can plan how you’re going to 
handle them ahead of time. If you feel triggered, will you leave? Will you plan not to 
stay very long to begin with, so as to avoid getting triggered? Will you use a medita­
tion technique? Maybe you’ll bring someone with you who is sober. Or if it’s possible, 
you’ll consider avoiding that situation altogether.
These are just a few examples of plans that you can lay out if you take the time to 
think about what’s coming up for you. It may be helpful to refer back to the Urge 
Planner in chapter 6. Plan on completing this exercise on a weekly basis for as long 
as you can (ideally, for the first six months of your recovery). You can discuss it with 
your counselor or therapist, if you have one, and get some input as to how to plan for 
potentially triggering situations.
Signs of Trouble
If you think back to the last time that you slipped or relapsed, there were probably 
warning signs before you entered the situation in which you actually drank or used. 
Recovery is not just about behaviors (such as avoiding risky situations, or going to 
therapy or self-­help meetings)—­as you well know now, it is also a mindset.
As the strength of your motivation for recovery naturally moves up and down, 
you may find yourself slipping out of the recovery mindset at times. Although this 
does not necessarily mean that you are headed straight for a relapse, it is best to be 
aware when it is happening so that you can take steps to renew your motivation and 
get yourself back on track. In exercise 11.1, you’ll find a list of some common warning 
signs. These signs can relate to either your mindset or your behaviors. As you look 
through this list, think about times when you’ve relapsed; in the days and even the 
weeks before, you probably experienced some changes in the way you were thinking 

Your Personalized Recovery Plan
199
about your recovery, or the way you were acting or feeling emotionally. Maybe you 
didn’t realize at the time that these warning signs were there, but now as you look 
back on it, things may become a little bit clearer.
Exercise 11.1: My Warning Signs of Relapse
Look at the list of warning signs below and place a check mark beside the ones that you can 
identify with, or that you’ve observed in yourself prior to a relapse.
      	
Stopping or cutting back your attendance in therapy or counseling
      	
Thinking about ways that you might be able to drink or use without anyone 
knowing about it
      	
Fantasizing often about how good it would feel to drink or use, while blocking 
out or thinking very little about the potential negative consequences
      	
Stopping or cutting back your attendance in self-­help groups, such as AA or 
SMART Recovery
      	
Isolating yourself
      	
Placing yourself in risky situations
      	
Avoiding talking about mixed feelings or doubts you have about staying sober
      	
Starting to use a drug other than your “substance of choice”
      	
Feeling intense negative emotions, such as depression, anxiety, anger, or 
irritability
      	
Feeling that you don’t fit in with others who are in recovery
      	
Blaming other people for your problems
      	
Having very few activities that are fun or enjoyable in your routine
      	
Not sleeping well or not sleeping enough
      	
Neglecting responsibilities, such as paying bills, doing household tasks, taking 
care of loved ones, or getting to work or school
      	
Avoiding talking about feelings of unhappiness

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
200
      	
Feeling hopeless about your ability to rebuild your life
      	
Keeping alcohol, drugs, or paraphernalia at home
      	
Hanging on to phone numbers of dealers or people you used to use with
      	
Lying
      	
Rejecting help from others
      	
Feeling bored or having lots of unstructured or unplanned time
      	
Spending time with people who drink or use
      	
Acting defensive when others around you express concern about your well-­
being or recovery
Other relapse warning signs:



Now, looking back at the list, identify which you think are the top three signs 
that you are at risk of relapse. You will need a plan for what you will do if you or 
someone close to you points out any of these signs. Here are some examples of poten­
tial plans:
•	 Discuss it with your therapist or counselor, if you have one.
•	 Seek to start or resume therapy or counseling, if you’re not currently 
attending.
•	 Consult with a psychiatrist to evaluate whether medications are needed to 
manage any psychological symptoms (such as depression or anxiety).
•	 Increase your attendance at self-­help meetings.
•	 Call your 12-­step sponsor if you have one, or seek out a sponsor.

Your Personalized Recovery Plan
201
•	 Review relevant exercises in this workbook related to strengthening your 
motivation, challenging your thoughts, and increasing pleasant activities.
•	 Initiate an exercise plan, or step up your existing one.
You might come up with other ideas. But this list can help you begin to think 
about how you can respond to your warning signs.
My Top Three Warning Signs of Relapse:
Warning sign #1: 
Plan if I notice this sign: 

Warning sign #2: 
Plan if I notice this sign: 

Warning sign #3: 
Plan if I notice this sign: 

Put a Stop to the Slip
You might remember our discussion about the difference between a “slip” and a 
relapse. To review here briefly, the first time you drink or use after a period of being 
sober or abstinent, it is called a “slip.” Although you may be committed to abstinence, 
and it might be hard to imagine that you’d slip, studies of addiction have shown that 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
202
the tendency to return to substance use after a period of sobriety is part of the illness 
(NIDA 2010). So it is best to be prepared for the possibility that this could happen.
The important thing to remember is that your response to a slip makes all the 
difference in terms of the impact it has on your recovery. A slip doesn’t have to set 
you back tremendously, if you’re willing to address it immediately by: (1) talking 
about it with a counselor, therapist, or sponsor; (2) figuring out what went wrong; 
and (3) putting safeguards into place to prevent it from progressing into a relapse. A 
relapse happens when you allow a slip to lead to an extended period of days, weeks, 
or longer during which you actively drink or use drugs. Here are some things that you 
can tell yourself to prevent a slip from heading in the relapse direction:
•	 I can leave the slip behind me as long as I don’t repeat it.
•	 I can use the slip as a learning opportunity. If I understand why it happened, I can 
prevent it from happening again.
•	 I may feel bad about it, but that will pass. As long as I get right back on the road to 
recovery, without wasting any more time drinking or using, I will feel good about 
myself again very soon.
Another important thing to remember is to catch yourself if you find that you are 
getting into the spiraling lapse mindset. In chapter 5, we discussed how sometimes 
when you experience a slip or a lapse, it can trigger dysfunctional thoughts like, I’ve 
blown it. I’m a total failure. I’ll never stay sober. I have nothing to lose by continuing to drink (or 
use). Beware of the spiraling lapse frame of mind; it is a sure pathway from a slip to a 
full-­blown relapse. You can avoid it by recognizing it for what it is, and intentionally 
bringing your thoughts into a more CBT-­oriented mindset, in which you view the slip 
as a learning opportunity that you can quickly move past.
Once you’ve preserved your recovery mindset, brought yourself out of the spiral­
ing lapse mode, accepted that the slip happened, and decided that you are ready to 
put it behind you, there are a few more steps you can take to prevent any further drug 
or alcohol use:
•	 Go back to chapter 3 and revisit your motivation to stay sober. Pay particu­
lar attention to exercises 3.2, on the benefits and drawbacks of quitting 
versus continuing to drink or use, and 3.3, on ways to strengthen your 
motivation. Understanding the importance of renewing your motivation 
often is a key part of successful recovery and keeping your rational mind in 
control.

Your Personalized Recovery Plan
203
•	 Learn from the situation. Find someone—­preferably a therapist or coun­
selor—­to review the sequence of events leading to the relapse and help you 
figure out what went wrong. This will involve considering the following 
questions:
•	 Were there any warning signs over the past few days, weeks, or months?
•	 Did you address the warning signs? If so, what more could you have 
done? If not, why not?
•	 How did you end up in the situation in which you relapsed?
•	 What was the trigger?
•	 How did the relapse affect you?
•	 How can you cope more effectively the next time you are confronted 
with a similar situation or trigger?
•	 Step up the support. A slip is a sign that one or more parts of your recovery 
plan were not firmly in place. Sometimes stepping up the social or profes­
sional support for your recovery can help solidify your relapse prevention 
program. This could take the form of:
•	 More involvement in self-­help groups
•	 Getting into therapy or increasing the frequency of therapy
•	 More social contact with people in recovery (like having coffee with 
sober friends, or making more efforts to connect with others who are in 
recovery)
•	 Considering medication treatment for your addiction or mental health 
if you aren’t receiving any, or discussing a change to your current medi­
cation treatment with your provider.
Your Personalized Relapse Prevention Plan
Now that you’ve worked your way through all of the chapters and the exercises in 
each one, you are well positioned to manage your recovery both now and in the long 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
204
term. In each of the chapters, you’ve been trying new skills and, hopefully, making 
mental notes about which of them have been most helpful to you.
In this section you’re going to revisit these skills and mark off the ones that you 
think you’d like to use, going forward in your recovery. Some of the skills are general 
recovery lifestyle behaviors; they keep you feeling happy and balanced, reducing your 
risk of a relapse. (Examples include doing pleasant activities, exercising, and commu­
nicating effectively with others.) Other coping skills that you’ve learned are more 
specific to risky situations (like surfing the urge, the mindfulness-­based SOBER 
breathing exercise, and challenging red flag thoughts). Reflecting on the skills you’ve 
learned in this program, place a check mark beside those that you found helpful:
Motivation Enhancing Skills
      	
Thinking about what stage of change you’re in, rating your current 
motivation to quit (from 0 to 10), and thinking about what it would 
take to move your motivation rating up by at least one point
      	
Reviewing the benefits and drawbacks of continuing to drink or use, 
as well as the benefits and drawbacks of quitting
      	
Reviewing the problems that alcohol or drug use have caused in your 
life
      	
Thinking about what concerns you about your alcohol or drug use, 
and what you can imagine happening if you were to continue drinking 
or using
      	
Thinking about how quitting has affected and will continue to affect 
your life
      	
Reviewing the reasons why you believe you have the ability to get and 
stay sober
General Wellness Skills
      	
Being aware of seemingly irrelevant decisions
      	
Selecting and committing to an exercise activity
      	
Keeping an exercise log
      	
Rewarding yourself for following through on your exercise plans

Your Personalized Recovery Plan
205
      	
Identifying the Safety Nets in your social and family life, as well as 
risky relationships
      	
Using assertive communication to make recovery-­related requests from 
others and to refuse offers of alcohol or drugs
      	
Expanding your social network in one or more ways
      	
Keeping a schedule
      	
Identifying and scheduling pleasant activities that are incompatible 
with drinking and using
      	
Rewarding yourself for following through with pleasant activities
Alcohol-­ and Drug-­Specific Coping Skills
      	
Identifying your triggers
      	
Being aware of your red flag thoughts
      	
Recognizing and challenging mistakes in thinking
      	
Monitoring your triggers and cravings
      	
Getting rid of all alcohol, drugs, and paraphernalia
      	
Surfing the urge to cope with a craving
      	
Distracting yourself to cope with a craving
      	
Delaying the decision to drink or use by fifteen minutes to cope with 
a craving
      	
Using the Urge Planner to anticipate and plan for risky situations
      	
Using mindfulness exercises to develop a meditation practice
      	
Using the SOBER mindfulness exercise to cope with a craving
      	
Practicing mindful acceptance
      	
Getting involved (or more involved) in mutual self-­help groups, like 
AA or SMART Recovery

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
206
Mood and Anger Management
      	
Monitoring your mood and cravings
      	
Monitoring your anxiety and cravings
      	
Identifying and challenging negative thoughts that lead to anxiety and 
depression
      	
Identifying anger triggers
      	
Practicing “giving it a beat” when you’re angry
      	
Challenging angry thoughts
Now, you will list the skills in each category that you plan to use as your “go-­to” 
strategies in your personalized relapse prevention plan. Think about which exercises 
have spoken the most to you and your personal experience. Also think about which 
of the techniques you have found yourself using when you were not reading this 
workbook, but just out living your life and navigating challenges in your recovery.
When I need to enhance my motivation for recovery, I will use the following techniques:
1.	 
2.	 
3.	 
The general wellness skills that I plan to continue using in my recovery include:
1.	 
2.	 
3.	 

Your Personalized Recovery Plan
207
4.	 
5.	 
6.	 
The alcohol-­ and drug-­specific coping skills that I plan to use when I am tempted to 
drink or use are:
1.	 
2.	 
3.	 
4.	 
5.	 
6.	 
People I can call if I am tempted to drink or use include:
1.	 
2.	 
3.	 

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
208
The mood and anger management techniques that I will continue to use include:
1.	 
2.	 
3.	 
Other skills I plan to use going forward in my recovery:
1.	 
2.	 
3.	 
Wrap-­up
Congratulations on your hard work and persistence throughout this workbook. You’ve 
taken in a lot of new information about the science of addiction, and you’ve tried out 
many different types of coping skills. In doing so, you’ve laid the essential ground­
work for your ongoing recovery.
You now have a range of evidence-­based therapy techniques that are used in addic­
tion treatment at your fingertips, and you have the flexibility to choose which ones 
you’d like to use, based on the relapse prevention plan that you’ve laid out in this 
final chapter. You’ve made great strides in developing the tools that you need to live 
a well-balanced and happy life in your recovery. Keep up your hard work; you are well 
on your way toward rebuilding a satisfying and rewarding life, free from alcohol and 
drugs.

Acknowledgments
T
his book would not have been possible without the support and guidance of 
many to whom I am deeply grateful. Several of my most influential teachers 
throughout my training as a clinician and scientist enabled me to become the 
expert that I am in the various therapy approaches to the treatment of addiction that 
are integrated in this book, and I am deeply grateful to them: Bruce Overmier, Sandra 
Brown, John McQuaid, and Tamara Wall. I am profoundly appreciative for the men­
torship of Thomas Mintz, who inspired me with his wisdom and knowledge about 
how to synthesize my scientific expertise and clinical experience to form a book that 
could reach addicted clients directly.
The idea that formed the basis of this book—­that integrating the various evidence-­
based therapeutic approaches to addiction treatment and providing them in a single 
source could enable those with addictions to individualize their approach to recovery—­
was born out of a series of conversations with Richard Rawson, to whom I owe an 
enormous debt of gratitude for helping me form and crystallize my ideas, and for 
fueling my passion for addiction science and treatment throughout my career.
I have valued greatly the professionalism and skills of Tesilya Hanauer and her 
colleagues at New Harbinger, who contributed to the development and production of 
this book, including Jess Beebe, Marisa Solís, and Angela Autry Gorden, as well as 
freelance editor Susan LaCroix. To Hélène Chokron Garneau at UCLA, I extend a 
special thank-­you for her dedication to my clinical research and tireless efforts in the 
process of assembling this workbook. I’d also like to gratefully acknowledge the help 
and support of the agencies that have funded my research on developing and evaluat­
ing behavioral treatments for addictions and related conditions: the National Institute 
on Drug Abuse and the National Institute on Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
210
It is a pleasure to thank the many clients I have worked with over the years who 
have helped me understand the psychology of addiction and the struggles that are at 
the core of recovery.
Finally, I am forever grateful to my family for their love and support throughout 
the process of bringing this project to fruition; I know how lucky I am.

Resources
Drug Facts
http://easyread.drugabuse.gov/
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
Information about finding a certified specialist: http://www.beckinstituteblog
.org/2007/03/cognitive-behavior-therapist-how-to-find-one/
Frequently asked questions about CBT: 
www.beckinstitute.org/cognitive-behavioral-therapy/
CBT tools and resources: www.beckinstitute.org/cbtstore/
List of books that discuss CBT and substance abuse: 
www.beckinstitute.org/cbtstore/cbt-books/#substance
Therapist Finders:
http://locator.apa.org/
http://www.abctcentral.org/xFAT/
http://www.nacbt.org/searchfortherapists.ASP
http://members.academyofct.org (click on “Find a Therapist”)

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
212
Addiction Medicine
Find an addiction medicine professional: 
http://community.asam.org/search/default.asp?m=basic
American Society of Addiction Medicine’s page for the public: 
http://www.asam.org/for-the-public
Mindfulness
UCLA Mindful Awareness Research Center: http://marc.ucla.edu/
Find a mindfulness-based addiction therapist: 
http://www.mindfulrp.com/For-Clients.html
Listen to audio recordings of practices used in Mindfulness-­Based Relapse 
Prevention: http://www.mindfulrp.com/For-Clients.html
UCSD Center for Mindfulness: https://ucsdcfm.wordpress.com/
Mindful: http://www.mindful.org/
Book about mindfulness for addiction: Bowen, Chawla, and Marlatt (2010). 
Mindfulness-Based Relapse Prevention for Addictive Behaviors: A Clinician’s Guide. New 
York: Guilford Press.
Harm Reduction
Harm Reduction Coalition: http://www.harmreduction.org
Alan Marlatt on Harm Reduction Therapy: http://www.psychotherapy.net
/interview/marlatt-harm-reduction
Book about harm reduction: Marlatt, Larimer, and Witkiewitz (2011). Harm 
Reduction, Second Edition: Pragmatic Strategies for Managing High-­Risk Behaviors. New 
York: Guilford Press.

References
American Psychiatric Association. 2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th ed. 
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Annis, H. M., and C. S. Davis. 1989. “Relapse Prevention Training: A Cognitive-­Behavioral Approach 
Based on Self-­Efficacy Theory.” Journal of Chemical Dependency Treatment 2(2): 81–­103. 
Astin, J. A. 1997. “Stress Reduction Through Mindfulness Meditation: Effects on Psychological 
Symptomatology, Sense of Control, and Spiritual Experiences.” Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics 
66(2): 97–­106.
Bowen, S., N. Chawla, and G. A. Marlatt. 2010. Mindfulness-­Based Relapse Prevention for Addictive 
Behaviors: A Clinician’s Guide. New York: Guilford Press.
Bowen, S., K. Witkiewitz, S. L. Clifasefi, J. Grow, N. Chawla, S. H. Hsu, H. A. Carroll, E. Harrop, S. 
E. Collins, K. Lustyk, and M. E. Larimer. 2014. “Relative Efficacy of Mindfulness-­Based Relapse 
Prevention, Standard Relapse Prevention, and Treatment as Usual for Substance Use Disorders.” 
JAMA Psychiatry 71(5): 547–­56.
Breslin, F. C., M. Zack, and S. McMain. 2002. “An Information-­Processing Analysis of Mindfulness: 
Implications for Relapse Prevention in the Treatment of Substance Abuse.” Clinical Psychology: 
Science and Practice 9(3), 275–­99.
Brown, S. A., S. V. Glasner-­Edwards, S. R. Tate, J. R. McQuaid, J. Chalekian, and E. Granholm. 2006. 
“Integrated Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Versus Twelve-­Step Facilitation for Substance 
Dependent Adults with Depressive Disorders.” Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 38(4): 449–­60.
Budney, A. J., B. A. Moore, H. L. Rocha, and S. T. Higgins. 2006. “Clinical Trial of Abstinence-­Based 
Vouchers and Cognitive-­Behavioral Therapy for Cannabis Dependence.” Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology 74(2): 307–­16.
Carlson, L. E., M. Speca, K. D. Patel, and E. Goodey. 2004. “Mindfulness-­Based Stress Reduction in 
Relation to Quality of Life, Mood, Symptoms of Stress and Levels of Cortisol, Dehydroepiandrosterone 
Sulfate (DHEAS) and Melatonin in Breast and Prostate Cancer Outpatients.” Psychoneuroendocrinology 
29(4): 448–­74.
Centers for Disease Control. 2015. “How Much Physical Activity Do Adults Need?” Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/everyone/guidelines/adults.html.
Childress A. R., R. N. Ehrman, Z. Wang, Y. Li, N. Sciortino, J. Hakun, W. Jens, J. Suh, J. Listerud, K. 
Marquez, T. Franklin, D. Langleben, J. Detre, and C. P. O’Brien. 2008. “Prelude to Passion: 
Limbic Activation by Unseen Drug and Sexual Cues.” PLoS ONE 3(1): e1506.
Church S. H., J. L. Rothenberg, M. A. Sullivan, G. Bornstein, and E. V. Nunes. 2001. “Concurrent 
Substance Use and Outcome in Combined Behavioral and Naltrexone Therapy for Opiate 
Dependence.” American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse 27: 441–­452.
Cuijpers, P., F. Smit, and A. van Straten. 2007. “Psychological Treatments of Subthreshold Depression: 
A Metaanalytic Review.” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 115(6), 434–­41.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
214
Daughters, S.B., A. R. Braun, M. N. Sargeant, E. K. Reynolds, D. E. Hopko, C. Blanco, and C. W. 
Lejuez. 2008. “Effectiveness of a Brief Behavioral Treatment for Inner-­City Illicit Drug Users 
with Elevated Depressive Symptoms: The Life Enhancement Treatment for Substance Use (LETS 
ACT!).” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 69, 122–­29.
DeVito, E. E., P. D. Worhunsky, K. M. Carroll, B. J. Rounsaville, H. Kober, and M. N. Potenza. 2012. 
“A Preliminary Study of the Neural Effects of Behavioral Therapy for Substance Use Disorders.” 
Drug and Alcohol Dependence 122(3): 228–­235.
Di Chiara, G., and A. Imperato. 1988. “Drugs Abused by Humans Preferentially Increase Synaptic 
Dopamine Concentrations in the Mesolimbic System of Freely Moving Rats.” Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 85(14): 5274–8.
Dobson, K. S. 2013. “The Science of CBT: Toward a Metacognitive Model of Change?” Behavior 
Therapy 44(2): 224–­27.
Dolezal, B. A., J. Chudzynski, T. W. Storer, M. Abrazado, J. Penate, L. Mooney, D. Dickerson, R. A. 
Rawson, and C. B. Cooper. 2013. “Eight Weeks of Exercise Training Improves Fitness Measures 
in Methamphetamine-­Dependent Individuals in Residential Treatment.” Journal of Addiction 
Medicine 7(2): 122–­28.
Enoch, M. 2012. “The Influence of Gene-­Environment Interactions on the Development of Alcoholism 
and Drug Dependence.” Current Psychiatry Reports 14(2): 150–­58.
Epstein, E. E. and B. S. McCrady. 2009. Overcoming Alcohol Use Problems: A Cognitive-­Behavioral Treatment 
Program. New York: Oxford University Press.
Evans, S., S. Ferrando, M. Findler, C. Stowell, C. Smart, and D. Haglin. 2008. “Mindfulness-Based 
Cognitive Therapy for Generalized Anxiety Disorder.” Journal of Anxiety Disorders 22(4): 716–­21.
Farabee, D., R. Rawson, and M. McCann. 2002. “Adoption of Drug Avoidance Activities Among 
Patients in Contingency Management and Cognitive-­Behavioral Treatments.” Journal of Substance 
Abuse Treatment 23: 343–­50.
Glasner-­Edwards, S., P. Marinelli-­Casey, R. Gonzales, M. Hillhouse, A. Ang, L. J. Mooney, and R. 
Rawson. 2009. “Depression Among Methamphetamine Users: Association with Outcomes from 
the Methamphetamine Treatment Project at Three-­Year Follow-­Up.” Journal of Nervous and Mental 
Disease 197: 225–­31.
Glasner-Edwards, S. L. J. Mooney, A. Ang, H. C. Garneau, E. Hartwell, M. Brecht, and R. A. Rawson. 
Forthcoming. “Mindfulness-Based Relapse Prevention for Stimulant Dependent Adults: A Pilot 
Randomized Clinical Trial.” Addiction.
Glasner-­Edwards, S., L. J. Mooney, A. Ang, M. Hillhouse, and R. Rawson. 2013. “Does Post-­Traumatic 
Stress Disorder Affect Post-­Treatment Methamphetamine Use?” Journal of Dual Diagnosis 9(2): 
123–­28.
Green, L., and J. H. Kagel, (Eds.) 1996. Advances in Behavioral Economics, Vol. 3: Substance Use and Abuse. 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Hanson, G. R. 2002. “New Insights into Relapse.” NIDA Notes 17:3. National Institute on Drug 
Abuse. National Institute of Health. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Hettema, J., J. Steele, and W. R. Miller. 2005. “Motivational Interviewing.” Annual Review of Clinical 
Psychology 1: 91–­111.
Higgins, S. T., S. M. Alessi, and R. L. Dantona. 2002. “Voucher-­Based Incentives. A Substance Abuse 
Treatment Innovation.” Addictive Behaviors 27(6): 887–­910.
Kabat-­Zinn J., A. O. Massion, J. Kristeller, L. G. Peterson, K. E. Fletcher, L. Pbert, W. R. Lenderking, 
and S. F. Santorelli. 1992. “Effectiveness of a Meditation-­Based Stress Reduction Program in the 
Treatment of Anxiety Disorders.” American Journal of Psychiatry 149(7): 936–­43.
Kabat-­Zinn J. 1982. “An Outpatient Program in Behavioral Medicine for Chronic Pain Patients Based 
on the Practice of Mindfulness Meditation: Theoretical Considerations and Preliminary Results.” 
General Hospital Psychiatry 4(1): 33–­47.

References
215
Kabat-­Zinn, J. 1990. Full Catastrophe Living: Using the Wisdom of Your Body and Mind to Face Stress, Pain, 
and Illness. New York: Delacorte.
Kabat-­Zinn, J. 2003. “Mindfulness-­Based Interventions in Context: Past, Present, and Future.” 
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice 10(2): 144–­56.
Kelly, J. F., and M.C. Greene. 2014. “Where There’s a Will There’s a Way: A Longitudinal Investigation 
of the Interplay Between Recovery Motivation and Self-­Efficacy in Predicting Treatment 
Outcome.” Psychology of Addictive Behaviors 28(3): 928–­34.
Kelly, J. F., B. Hoeppner, R. L. Stout, and M. Pagano. 2012. “Determining the Relative Importance 
of the Mechanisms of Behavior Change Within Alcoholics Anonymous: A Multiple Mediator 
Analysis.” Addiction 107: 289–­99.
Kendler, K. S., L. M Karkowski, M. C. Neale, and C. A. Prescott. 2000. “Illicit Psychoactive Substance 
Use, Heavy Use, Abuse, and Dependence in a US Population-­Based Sample of Male Twins.” 
Archives of General Psychiatry 57: 261–­69.
Larimer, M. E., R. S. Palmer, and G. A. Marlatt. 1999. “Relapse Prevention. An Overview of Marlatt’s 
Cognitive-­Behavioral Model.” Alcohol Research and Health 23(2): 151–­60.
Magidson, J. F., S. M. Gorka, L. MacPherson, D. R. Hopko, C. Blanco, C. W. Lejuez, and S. B. 
Daughters. 2011. “Examining the Effect of the Life Enhancement Treatment for Substance Use 
(LETS ACT) on Residential Substance Abuse Treatment Retention.” Addictive Behaviors 36(6), 
615–­23.
Marlatt, G. A., and J. R. Gordon (Eds). 1985. Relapse Prevention: Maintenance Strategies in the Treatment 
of Addictive Behaviors. New York: Guilford Press.
Marlatt, G. A. 1996. “Taxonomy of High-­Risk Situations for Alcohol Relapse: Evolution and 
Development of a Cognitive-­Behavioral Model.” Addiction 91(suppl): 37–­49.
Marlatt, G. A. and B. D. Ostafin. 2005. “Being Mindful of Automaticity in Addiction: A Clinical 
Perspective.” In Handbook of Implicit Cognition and Addiction, edited by R. W. Wiers and A. W. 
Stacy. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Mazzucchelli, T., R. Kane, and C. Rees. 2009. “Behavioral Activation Treatments for Depression in 
Adults: A Meta-­Analysis and Review.” Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice 16(4), 383–­411.
McAuliffe W. E. 1990. “A Randomized Control Trial of Recovery Training for Opioid Addicts in New 
England and Hong Kong.” Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 22: 197–­209.
McLellan, A. T., D. C. Lewis, C. P. O’Brien, and H. D. Kleber. 2000. “Drug Dependence, a Chronic 
Medical Illness: Implications for Treatment, Insurance, and Outcomes Evaluation.” JAMA. 
284(13): 1689–­95.
Miller, W. R. 1983. “Motivational Interviewing with Problem Drinkers.” Behavioral Psychotherapy 11: 
147–­72.
Miller, W. R. 1996. “Motivational Interviewing: Research, Practice, and Puzzles.” Addictive Behaviors 
21(6), 835–­42.
Mooney, L.J., Cooper, C., London, E.D., Chudzynski, J., Dolezal, B., Dickerson, D., Brecht, M.L., 
Penate, J., and Rawson, R.A. (2014). Exercise for methamphetamine dependence: rationale, 
design, and methodology. Contemporary Clinical Trials, 37(1): 139–­47.
Morgenstern, J., E. Labouvie, B. S. McCrady, C. W. Kahler, and R. M. Frey. 1997. “Affiliation with 
Alcoholics Anonymous After Treatment: A Study of Its Therapeutic Effects and Mechanisms of 
Action.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 65: 768–­77.
NIDA (National Institute on Drug Abuse). 2010. Drugs, Brains, and Behavior: The Science of Addiction. 
NIH Pub No. 10–­5605.
Pollack, M. H., S. A. Penava, E. Bolton, J. J. Worthington III, G. L. Allen, F. J. Farach, and M. W. 
Otto. 2002. “A Novel Cognitive-­Behavioral Approach for Treatment-­Resistant Drug Dependence.” 
Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 23: 335–­42.

The Addiction Recovery Skills Workbook
216
Prochaska, J. O., C. C. DiClemente, and J. C. Norcross. 1992. “In Search of How People Change: 
Applications to Addictive Behaviors.” American Psychologist 47(9): 1102–­14.
Ramel, W., P. R. Goldin, P. E. Carmona, and J. R. McQuaid. 2004. “The Effects of Mindfulness 
Meditation on Cognitive Processes and Affect in Patients with Past Depression.” Cognitive Therapy 
and Research 28(4): 433–­55.
Rawson R. A., J. Chudzynski, L. Mooney, R. Gonzales, A. Ang, D. Dickerson, J. Penate, B. A. Salem, 
B. Dolezal, and C. B. Cooper. 2015. “Impact of an Exercise Intervention on Methamphetamine 
Use Outcomes Post-­Residential Treatment Care.” Drug and Alcohol Dependence. Under review.
Rawson, R. A., P. Marinelli-­Casey, M. D. Anglin, A. Dickow, Y. Frazier, C. Gallagher, G. P. Galloway, 
J. Herrell, A. Huber, M. J. McCann, J. Obert, S. Pennell, C. Reiber, D. Vandersloot, and J. Zweben. 
2004. “A Multi-­Site Comparison of Psychosocial Approaches for the Treatment of 
Methamphetamine Dependence.” Addiction 99(6): 708–­17.
Roemer, L., and S. M. Orsillo. 2003. “Mindfulness: A Promising Intervention Strategy in Need of 
Further Study.” Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice 10(2): 172–­78.
Rohsenow, D. J., P. M. Monti, R. A. Martin, S. M. Colby, M. G. Myers, S. B. Gulliver, R. A. Brown, 
T. I. Mueller, A. Gordon, and D. B. Abrams. 2004. “Motivational Enhancement and Coping Skills 
Training for Cocaine Abusers: Effects on Substance Use Outcomes.” Addiction 99(7): 862–­74.
Shapiro, S. L., G. E. Schwartz, and G. Bonner. 1998. “Effects of Mindfulness-­Based Stress Reduction 
on Medical and Premedical Students.” Journal of Behavioral Medicine 21(6): 581–­99.
Sheff, D. 2014. “How Philip Seymour Hoffman Could Have Been Saved.” Time, Feb 2. Retrieved from 
http://time.com/3390/how-philip-seymour-hoffman-could-have-been-saved/
Sinha R. 2007. “The Role of Stress in Addiction Relapse.” Current Psychiatry Reports 9: 388–­95.
Sinha, R. 2008. “Chronic Stress, Drug Use, and Vulnerability to Addiction.” Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences 1141, 105–­30.
Stein M. D., D. S. Herman, D. A. Solomon, J. L. Anthony, B. J. Anderson, S. E. Ramsey, and I. W. 
Miller. 2004. “Adherence to Treatment of Depression in Active Injection Drug Users: The Minerva 
Study.” Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 26, 87–­93.
Sturmey, P. 2009. “Behavioral Activation Is an Evidence-­Based Treatment for Depression.” Behavior 
Modification 33(6), 818–­29.
Tate, S. R., J. Wu, J. R. McQuaid, K. Cummins, C. Shriver, M. Krenek, and S. A. Brown. 2008. 
“Comorbidity of Substance Dependence and Depression: Role of Life Stress and Self-­Efficacy in 
Sustaining Abstinence.” Psychology of Addictive Behaviors 22(1): 47–­57.
Timko, C., R. Billow, and A. DeBenedetti. 2006. “Determinants of 12-­step Group Affiliation and 
Moderators of the Affiliation-­Abstinence Relationship.” Drug and Alcohol Dependence 83(2): 
111–­21.
Tsuang, M. T., M. J. Lyons, J. M. Meyer, T. Doyle, S. A. Eisen, J. Goldberg, W. True, N. Lin, R. 
Toomey, and L. Eaves. 1998. “Co-­Occurrence of Abuse of Different Drugs in Men: The Role of 
Drug-­Specific and Shared Vulnerabilities.” Archives of General Psychiatry 55(11): 967–­72.
Tsuang M. T., W. M. Stone, and S. V. Faraone. 2001. “Genes, Environment, and Schizophrenia.” 
British Journal of Psychiatry 178(40): s18–­s24.
Volkow, N.D., L. Chang, G. Wang, J. S. Fowler, D. Franceschi, M. Sedler, S. J. Gatley, E. Miller, R. 
Hitzemann, Y. Ding, and J. Logan. 2001. “Loss of Dopamine Transporters in Methamphetamine 
Abusers Recovers with Protracted Abstinence.” Journal of Neruoscience 21(23): 9414–­18.
Williams, K. A., M. M. Kolar, B. E. Reger, and J. C. Pearson. 2001. “Evaluation of a Wellness-Based 
Mindfulness Stress Reduction Intervention: A Controlled Trial.” American Journal of Health 
Promotion 15(6): 422–­32.
Witkiewitz K., M. K. Lustyk, and S. Bowen. 2013. “Retraining the Addicted Brain: A Review of 
Hypothesized Neurobiological Mechanisms of Mindfulness-­Based Relapse Prevention.” Psychology 
of Addictive Behaviors 27(2): 351–­65.

Suzette Glasner Edwards, PhD, is associate professor of psychiatry at the University 
of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). As a principal investigator at the UCLA Integrated 
Substance Abuse Programs, her NIH-­funded research in the area of behavioral treat­
ments for addictions is widely published. She also maintains a private practice where 
she specializes in the use of cognitive behavioral, motivational, and mindfulness-­
based techniques to treat addictions and mental health problems.
Foreword writer Richard A. Rawson, PhD, is professor in residence in the depart­
ment of psychiatry at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), and codirec­
tor of the UCLA Integrated Substance Abuse Programs. He has worked in the sub­
stance abuse field since 1974. Rawson started the Matrix Institute on Addictions and 
conducts training on topics including basic principles of addiction and addiction 
treatment for counselors, MFCCs, psychologists, and physicians, and much more.


1-800-748-6273 / newharbinger.com
newh a r b in g e r publications
Follow Us
more books from  
new harbinger publications
Don’t miss out on new books in the subjects that interest you. 
Sign up for our Book Alerts at newharbinger.com/bookalerts
are you seeking a cbt therapist?  
the association for behavioral & cognitive therapies (abct) Find-a-therapist service offers 
a list of therapists schooled in cbt techniques. therapists listed are licensed professionals who 
have met the membership requirements of abct & who have chosen to appear in the directory.  
Please visit www.abct.org & click on Find a Therapist.
(VISA, MC, AMEX  /  prices subject to change without notice)
Who Am I WIthout You?
Fifty-two ways to rebuild  
self-esteem after a breakup
ISBN: 978-1626251427 / US $16.95
A WomAn’s AddIctIon 
Workbook
your guide to in-Depth healing
ISBN: 978-1572242975 / US $21.95
the dIvorce recoverY  
Workbook
how to heal from anger, hurt  
& resentment & build the  
life you want
ISBN: 978-1626250703 / US $22.95
the cognItIve behAvIoral  
Workbook For depressIon, 
second edItIon
a step-by-step program
ISBN: 978-1608823802 / US $24.95
lettIng go oF Anger,  
second edItIon
The eleven most common anger  
styles & what to Do about Them
ISBN: 978-1572244481 / US $16.95
get out oF Your mInd 
& Into Your lIFe
The new acceptance &  
commitment Therapy
ISBN: 978-1572244252 / US $21.95

new harbinger 
new harbinger
• 
• 
• 
1. 
2. 
3. 
new harbinger 
new harbinger
• 
• 
• 
1. 
2. 
3. 

                                                                                                                     SELF-HELP
newharbingerpublications
www.newharbinger.com
A seven-step program to help you 
overcome drug and alcohol addiction
If you struggle with drugs or alcohol, seeking help is a positive ﬁ rst step toward recovery. You’ve 
likely suﬀ ered a great deal as a result of your addiction, and you may have already learned that 
there’s no quick ﬁ x for managing the urge to drink or use. That’s why understanding the cause of 
your addiction—and the science behind your urges—is crucial for moving forward in your recovery.
In this workbook, you’ll ﬁ nd evidence-based techniques fusing cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), 
motivational interviewing, and mindfulness-based relapse prevention to help you understand 
the patterns of thoughts and actions that fuel your addiction, and to create your own unique 
recovery plan. Whether you’re already in treatment or have just admitted you have a problem, this 
workbook can help you move past your addiction and start living the meaningful life you desire.
With this book as your guide, you’ll learn:
• how addiction aﬀ ects your body and mind
• strategies to monitor and strengthen your 
motivation to get and stay sober
• healthy coping skills for when urges arise
• how to cultivate a mindfulness practice to 
aid in your recovery
“A cutting-edge, comprehensive, 
and interactive approach to the 
science of addiction recovery, 
written with great respect and 
compassion for the reader. 
Anyone struggling with the 
demons of addiction will ﬁ nd 
real help here, and hope.”
—Terri Cheney, author of the New York Times bestseller Manic
“Glasner-Edwards has taken 
the very best of addiction 
science and turned it into 
common sense and step-by-step 
instructions. … A powerful and 
practical tool to aid recovery.”
—A. T omas McLellan, founder and chairman of the board of 
the Treatment Research Institute, and former deputy director of 
the White House Oﬃ  ce of National Drug Control Policy
Suzette Glasner-Edwards, PhD, is associate professor 
of psychiatry at the University of California, Los 
Angeles (UCLA), and a principal investigator at 
the UCLA Integrated Substance Abuse Programs. 
She specializes in the use of cognitive behavioral, 
motivational, and mindfulness-based techniques to 
treat addictions and mental health problems.
Foreword writer Richard A. Rawson, PhD, is professor 
in residence in the department of psychiatry at UCLA, 
and codirector of the UCLA Integrated Substance 
Abuse Programs. He is one of the leading trainers in 
the ﬁ eld of substance abuse treatment and research.
