Night Falls Fast

—UNDERSTANDING SUICIDE—

KAY REDFIELD JAMISON

ALSO BY KAY REDFIELD JAMISON
An Unquiet Mind: A Memoir of Moods and Madness
Touched with Fire: Manic-Depressive Illness and the Artistic Temperament
Manic-Depressive Illness (with F. Goodwin)

Nicut Fatts Fast
— Understanding Suicide —

Kay Redfield Jamison

AurnnD A. Ksorr New York 1999

THIS IS A BORZOI BOOK
PUBLISHED BY ALFRED A. KNOPF
Copyright © 1999 by Kay Redfield Jamison
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American
Copyright Conventions. Published in the United States
by Alfred A. Knopf, a division of Random House, Inc.,
New York, and simultaneously in Canada by
Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto.
Distributed by Random House, Inc., New York.
www.randomhouse.com
Knopf, Borzoi Books, and the colophon are registered
trademarks of Random House, Inc.
Owing to limitations of space, acknowledgments for
permission to reprint previously published material
may be found following the index.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Jamison, Kay R.
Night falls fast : understanding suicide / by Kay Redfield
Jamison. — 1st ed.
p. cm.
eISBN: 978-0-307-77989-2
1. Suicide—United States. 2. Children—Suicidal behavior—
United States. 3. Youth—Suicidal behavior—United States.
I. Title.
RC569.J36 1999
616.85′8445′00973—dc21 99-311227
v3.1

For my husband,
Richard Jed Wyatt 
With deep love 
and
For my brother, 
Dean T. Jamison
Who kept the night at bay

Night falls fast.
Today is in the past.
Blown from the dark hill hither to my door
Three flakes, then four
Arrive, then many more.
—EDNA ST. VINCENT MILLAY

Contents
Cover
Other Books by This Author
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Epigraph
Prologue
I BURIED ABOVE GROUND
An Introduction to Suicide
1 Death Lies Near at Hand
History and Overview
2 To Measure the Heart’s Turbulence
Definitions and Magnitudes
Essay: THIS LIFE, THIS DEATH
II JUST HOPE HAS GONE
Psychology and Psychopathology
3 Take Off the Amber, Put Out the Lamp
The Psychology of Suicide
4 The Burden of Despair
Psychopathology and Suicide
5 What Matters It, If Rope or Garter
Methods and Places
Essay: THE LION ENCLOSURE
III PANGS OF NATURE, TAINTS OF BLOOD
The Biology of Suicide

6 A Plunge into Deep Waters
Genetic and Evolutionary Perspectives
7 Death-Blood
Neurobiology and Neuropathology
Essay: THE COLOURING TO EVENTS: THE DEATH OF MERIWETHER LEWIS
IV BUILDING AGAINST DEATH
Prevention of Suicide
8 Modest Magical Qualities
Treatment and Prevention
9 As a Society
The Public Health
10 A Half-Stitched Scar
Those Left Behind
Epilogue
Appendix: Resources for Information About Suicide, Mental
Illness, and Alcohol and Drug Abuse
Notes
Acknowledgments
A Note About the Author

PROLOGUE
Summer evenings at the Bistro Gardens in Beverly Hills tended toward the long
and languorous. My friend Jack Ryan and I went there often when I lived in Los
Angeles, and I invariably ordered the Dungeness crab and a scotch on the rocks.
Not so invariably, but from time to time, Jack would use the occasion to suggest
we get married. It was an idea with such patent potential for catastrophe that
neither of us had much of an inclination to take the recurring proposal with too
much gravity. But our friendship we took seriously.
This particular evening, having hooked and tugged out the last bits of crab, I
found myself edgily knocking the ice cubes around in my whisky glass. The
conversation was making me restless and uneasy. We were talking about suicide
and making a blood oath: if either of us again became deeply suicidal, we
agreed, we would meet at Jack’s home on Cape Cod. Once there, the nonsuicidal
one of us would have a week to persuade the other not to commit suicide; a week
to present all the reasons we could come up with for why the other should go
back on lithium, assuming that having stopped it was the most likely reason for
the danger of suicide (we both had manic-depressive illness and, despite the
better and often expressed judgment of others, had a tendency to stop taking our
lithium); a week to cajole the other into a hospital; to invoke conscience; to
impress upon the other the pain and damage to our families that suicide would
inevitably bring.
We would, we said, during this hostage week, walk along the beach and
remind the other of all of the times we had felt at the end of hope and, somehow,
had come back. Who, if not someone who had actually been there, could better
bring the other back from the edge? We both, in our own ways and in our own
intimate dealings with it, knew suicide well. We thought we knew how we could
keep it from being the cause of death on our death certificates.
We decided that a week was long enough to argue for life. If it didn’t work, at
least we would have tried. And, because we had years of cumulative experience
with lifestyles of snap impetuousness and knew how quick and final a suicidal
impulse could be, we further agreed that neither of us would ever buy a gun.
Nor, we swore, would we under any circumstances allow anyone else to keep a
gun in a house in which we lived.
“Cheers,” we said in synchrony, ice and glass clinking. We sealed our foray

into the planned and rational world. Still, I had my doubts. I listened to the
details, helped clarify a few, drank the rest of my scotch, and stared at the tiny
white lights in the gardens around us. Who were we kidding? Never once, during
any of my sustained bouts of suicidal depression, had I been inclined or able to
pick up a telephone and ask a friend for help. Not once. It wasn’t in me. How
could I seriously imagine that I would call Jack, make an airline reservation, get
to an airport, rent a car, and find my way out to his house on the Cape? It
seemed only slightly less absurd that Jack would go along with the plan,
although he, at least, was rich and could get others to handle the practicalities.
The more I thought about the arrangement, the more skeptical I became.
It is a tribute to the persuasiveness, reverberating energies and enthusiasms,
and infinite capacity for self-deception of two manic temperaments that by the
time the dessert soufflés arrived we were utterly convinced that our pact would
hold. He would call me; I would call him; we would outmaneuver the black
knight and force him from the board.
If it has ever been taken up as an option, however, the black knight has a
tendency to remain in play. And so it did. Many years later—Jack had long since
married and I had moved to Washington—I received a telephone call from
California: Jack had put a gun to his head, said a member of his family. Jack
had killed himself.
No week in Cape Cod, no chance to dissuade. A man who had been inventive
enough to earn a thousand patents for such wildly diverse creations as the Hawk
and Sparrow missile systems used by the U.S. Department of Defense, toys
played with by millions of children around the world, and devices used in
virtually every household in America; a Yale graduate and lover of life; a
successful businessman—this remarkably imaginative man had not been
inventive enough to find an alternative solution to a violent, self-inflicted death.
Although shaken by Jack’s suicide, I was not surprised by it. Nor was I
surprised that he had not called me. I, after all, had been dangerously suicidal
myself on several occasions since our Bistro Gardens compact and certainly had
not called him. Nor had I even thought of calling. Suicide is not beholden to an
evening’s promises, nor does it always hearken to plans drawn up in lucid
moments and banked in good intentions.
I know this for an unfortunate fact. Suicide has been a professional interest of
mine for more than twenty years, and a very personal one for considerably
longer. I have a hard-earned respect for suicide’s ability to undermine,
overwhelm, outwit, devastate, and destroy. As a clinician, researcher, and

teacher I have known or consulted on patients who hanged, shot, or asphyxiated
themselves; jumped to their deaths from stairwells, buildings, or overpasses;
died from poisons, fumes, prescription drugs; or slashed their wrists or cut their
throats. Close friends, fellow students from graduate school, colleagues, and
children of colleagues have done similar or the same. Most were young and
suffered from mental illness; all left behind a wake of unimaginable pain and
unresolvable guilt.
Like many who have manic-depressive illness, I have also known suicide in a
more private, awful way, and I trace the loss of a fundamental innocence to the
day that I first considered suicide as the only solution possible to an
unendurable level of mental pain. Until that time I had taken for granted, and
loved more than I knew, a temperamental lightness of mood and a fabulous
expectation of life. I knew death only in the most abstract of senses; I never
imagined it would be something to arrange or seek.
I was seventeen when, in the midst of my first depression, I became
knowledgeable about suicide in something other than an existential, adolescent
way. For much of each day during several months of my senior year in high
school, I thought about when, whether, where, and how to kill myself. I learned
to present to others a face at variance with my mind; ferreted out the location of
two or three nearby tall buildings with unprotected stairwells; discovered the
fastest flows of morning traffic; and learned how to load my father’s gun.
The rest of my life at the time—sports, classes, writing, friends, planning for
college—fell fast into a black night. Everything seemed a ridiculous charade to
endure; a hollow existence to fake one’s way through as best one could. But,
gradually, layer by layer, the depression lifted, and by the time my senior prom
and graduation came around, I had been well for months. Suicide had
withdrawn to the back squares of the board and become, once again,
unthinkable.
Because the privacy of my nightmare had been of my own designing, no one
close to me had any real idea of the psychological company I had been keeping.
The gap between private experience and its public expression was absolute; my
persuasiveness to others was unimaginably frightening.
Over the years, my manic-depressive illness became much worse, and the
reality of dying young from suicide became a dangerous undertow in my
dealings with life. Then, when I was twenty-eight years old, after a damaging
and psychotic mania, followed by a particularly prolonged and violent siege of
depression, I took a massive overdose of lithium. I unambivalently wanted to die
and nearly did. Death from suicide had become a possibility, if not a probability,
in my life.

Under the circumstances—I was, during this, a young faculty member in a
department of academic psychiatry—it was not a very long walk from personal
experience to clinical and scientific investigation. I studied everything I could
about my disease and read all I could find about the psychological and
biological determinants of suicide. As a tiger tamer learns about the minds and
moves of his cats, and a pilot about the dynamics of the wind and air, I learned
about the illness I had and its possible end point. I learned as best I could, and
as much as I could, about the moods of death.

I
Buried Above Ground
—AN INTRODUCTION TO SUICIDE—
Encompass’d with a thousand dangers,
Weary, faint, trembling with a thousand terrors.…
I … in a fleshly tomb, am
Buried above ground.
—WILLIAM COWPER
English poet William Cowper (1731–1800) on several occasions tried to
poison, stab, or hang himself. The self-described “lines written during a
period of insanity” were composed after one of his suicide attempts.

CHAPTER 1
Death Lies Near at Hand
—HISTORY AND OVERVIEW—
A tiny blade will sever the sutures of the neck, and when that joint,
which binds together head and neck, is cut, the body’s mighty mass
crumples in a heap. No deep retreat conceals the soul, you need no
knife at all to root it out, no deeply driven wound to find the vital
parts; death lies near at hand.… Whether the throat is strangled by a
knot, or water stops the breathing, or the hard ground crushes in the
skull of one falling headlong to its surface, or flame inhaled cuts off
the course of respiration—be it what it may; the end is swift.
—SENECA
NO ONE KNOWS who the first was to slash his throat with a piece of flint, take a
handful of poison berries, or intentionally drop his spear to the ground in battle.
Nor do we know who first jumped impulsively, or after thought, from a great
cliff; walked without food into an ice storm; or stepped into the sea with no
intention of coming back. Death, as Seneca states, has always lain close at hand;
yet it is a mystery why the first to kill himself did: Was it a sudden impulse, or
prolonged disease? An inner voice, commanding death? Perhaps shame or the
threat of capture by an enemy tribe? Despair? Exhaustion? Pressure from others
to spare common resources of food and land? No one knows.
It is unlikely that Homo sapiens was the first to think of suicide or act on the
thought of it; indeed, from an evolutionary perspective this would seem rather
arbitrary, given the sophistication of the hominids before us. The Cro-Magnons,
we believe, were skilled hunters, makers of blades and spears, plaiters of rope,
users of fire, and reflective, ingenious inventors of remarkable art forms and
elaborate burial rituals. And, there was Homo neanderthalensis before them, and
the hunting apes, such as chimpanzees, known to be aggressive, social, and
cognitively complex toolmakers. At what point did self-awareness enter into the
life of the brain? When did a conscious, deliberate intent to die veer off from the

borderlands of extreme recklessness and impetuous, life-threatening taking of
risks? Violence and recklessness, profound social withdrawal, and self-
mutilation are not, as we shall see, unique to our species. But perhaps suicide is.
We will never know who or why or how the first to kill himself did (or
herself; we will never know that either). But it is very likely that once suicide
occurred and others were cognizant of it, the act was repeated—in part because
the reasons and means would remain integral to the psychological and physical
environment, and in part because animals and humans learn, to considerable
extent, through imitation. Suicide, dangerously, has a contagious aspect; it has,
as well, for the vulnerable, an indisputable appeal as the solution of last resort.
Recorded observations about suicide are, of necessity, far more recent than its
first occurrences. Society’s attitudes, as captured in its literature, laws, and
religious sanctions, provide one window into our collective reactions to self-
murder. They give a historical perspective to the evolution of our perceptions
about suicide, perceptions that have varied from our seeing it as an accepted and
valued event to treating it as a sin or a crime, or conceptualizing it as the
consequence of adverse circumstances or pathological mental states.
Certainly, cultures have varied in their notions of self-inflicted death. Several—
for example, the Eskimo, Norse, Samoan, and Crow Indian—accepted, and even
encouraged, “altruistic” self-sacrifice among the elderly and sick. Among the
Yuit Eskimos of St. Lawrence Island, if an individual requested suicide three
times, relatives were obligated to assist in the killing. The person seeking suicide
dressed in ritual death garb and then was killed in a “destroying place” set aside
specifically for that purpose. To save commonly held resources of food or to
allow a nomadic society to move on unhindered by the physically ill or elderly,
some societies gave tacit if not explicit approval to suicide.
No early cultural or religious sanctions were attached to the suicides recorded
in the Old Testament or to the only one, that of Judas Iscariot, described in the
New (attitudes toward suicide hardened during the early years of Christianity).
Most of these deaths, like those of the ancient Greeks portrayed by Homer, were
seen as matters of honor, actions taken to avoid falling into the hands of a
military enemy, to atone for wrongdoing, or to uphold a religious or
philosophical principle. Hannibal, for example, took poison rather than be
captured or dishonored, as did Demosthenes, Cassius, Brutus, Cato, and scores
of others. Socrates, who refused to renounce his teachings and beliefs, drank
hemlock. Gladiators thrust wooden sticks or spears down their throats or forced
their heads into the spokes of moving carts in order that they might choose their

own, rather than another’s, time and way of dying.
Beliefs about suicide varied considerably in ancient Greece. The Stoics and
Epicureans believed strongly in the individual’s right to choose the means and
time of his death. Others were less accepting of the idea. In Thebes and Athens,
suicide was not against the law, but those who killed themselves were denied
funeral rites and the hand that had been used for the act was severed from the
arm. Aristotle regarded suicide as an act of cowardice, as well as an act against
the state; so, too, did Pythagoras. (Although, according to Heracleitus,
Pythagoras starved himself to death.) Roman law actively prohibited suicide and
further prohibited the passing on to heirs of the suicide’s possessions and estates.
The Catholic Church from its earliest days opposed suicide and, during the sixth
and seventh centuries, codified its opposition by excommunicating and denying
funeral rites to those who died by their own hand. Suicide was never justifiable,
wrote St. Augustine in an authoritative argument for the Church, because it
violated the sixth commandment of God, “Thou shalt not kill.”
Jewish custom forbade funeral orations for anyone who committed suicide;
mourners’ clothes were not encouraged, and burial was generally limited to an
isolated section of the cemetery, so as “not to bury the wicked next to the
righteous.” The Semachot, the rabbinic text on death and mourning, states that
“He who destroys himself consciously (‘la-daat’), we do not engage ourselves
with his funeral in any way. We do not tear the garments and we do not bare the
shoulder in mourning and we do not say eulogies for him.” Over time, a greater
latitude and compassion was extended to suicides committed while of an
unsound mind. “The general rule,” states one scholar of Jewish tradition, “is that
on the death of the suicide you do everything in honour of the surviving, such as
visit and comfort and console them, but you do nothing in honour of the dead
apart from burying them.” In Islamic law, suicide is a crime as grave as, or even
graver than, homicide.
Strong religious and legal sanctions against suicide are scarcely surprising; it
would be odd indeed if society had no reaction to such a dramatic, seemingly
inexplicable, frightening, frequently violent, and potentially infectious form of
death. Dante, writing almost seven hundred years ago in The Inferno, assigned a
particularly grim fate to those who committed suicide. Condemned to the
seventh circle of Hell and transformed into bleeding trees, the damned and
eternally restless souls of the suicides were subject to continuous agony and fed
upon mercilessly by the Harpies. They who in “mad violence” killed themselves
were, unlike all others who resided in Hell, also denied the use of their earthly

human forms.
The civil desecration of the corpses of suicides was common, as were attempts
to prevent untoward influence upon the living by physically isolating and
constraining the body and its potentially dangerous spirit. The bodies of those
who killed themselves were, in many countries, buried at night and at a
crossroads. The greater traffic over such crossroads was thought to “keep the
corpses down,” and the intersection of paths, it was believed, would make it
more difficult for the spirit to find its way home. In early Massachusetts,
cartloads of stones were unloaded at the crossroads where a suicide had been
buried. Not uncommonly, a stake was driven through a suicide’s heart, a practice
that has suggested to at least one scholar its similarity to the fate of a fourteenth-
century murderer whose body was discovered years ago in the peat bogs of
Sweden. The murderer’s captors, in order to stop the dead man from “walking,”
drove birch stakes through his back, side, and heart; they then sank his body into
a fen, at the meeting point of four parishes, in the not altogether unreasonable
belief that he would be unlikely to escape.
The Finns believed that because the act of suicide was a sudden one, it was
impossible for the living to make peace with the dead, and the soul of the suicide
was therefore “particularly restless and spooky.” The body of a suicide victim
was handled with dispatch and wariness:
The deceased was washed as soon as possible after the death and clad
in graveclothes. The male deceased were washed by men while the
female ones by women. Epileptics, lunatics and suicides were not
washed; on the contrary, they were buried prone on their stomach in
the clothes they wore when they died. They were lifted into the coffin
with pokers, never with bare hands, since it was feared that diseases
and curse would catch hold of the family.
Up to the early 1900’s the one who had committed suicide was
buried without any funeral services. The grave was located beyond the
fence of the churchyard, often even far away in the woods. It was a
general opinion that the corpse of the suicide was heavy. Among the
common people there were plenty of stories afloat that the coffin of the
suicide had been too heavy even for a horse to haul.
In France, the body of a suicide was dragged through the streets, head
downward, and then hanged on a gallows. French criminal law in the late
seventeenth century also required that the body thereafter be thrown into a sewer
or onto the city dump. Clergy did not attend the burial of a suicide, and corpses

could not be buried in consecrated ground. In parts of Germany, the corpses of
suicides were put in barrels and floated down the rivers so that they would not be
able to return to their home territories. Early Norwegian laws dictated that the
bodies of suicides were to be buried in the forest with those of other criminals, or
“in the tide, where the sea and the green turf meet.” Suicide was, strongly and
simply put, “an irreparable deed.”
Gradually, both religious and legal sanctions against suicide lessened.
Although many theologians continued to assert that suicide was among the more
unforgivable of sins—Martin Luther, for example, wrote that suicide was the
work of the Devil; the Puritan religious leaders deemed it abhorrent, despicable,
and an “individual submission to Satan”; John Wesley declared that the bodies of
those who killed themselves should be “gibbeted and … left to rot”; and
philosophers such as Locke, Rousseau, and, more recently, Kirkegaard railed
vociferously against any kind of social or religious acceptance of suicide—
judicial systems and the public increasingly considered suicide to be an act of an
unbalanced mind, rather than the result of weakness or personal sin. Corpses
were no longer buried at crossroads; gradually, instead, they were buried on the
north sides of churchyards. Rather than suffering damnation in isolation, the
bodies of suicides now kept the geographic company of society’s other
disreputables and non-Christians: excommunicants, unbaptized infants, and
executed felons.
Robert Burton’s widely read and influential The Anatomy of Melancholy,
which depicted with compassion the bonds between madness, melancholy, and
suicide and argued for mercy for those who were in such despair and agitation as
to kill themselves, was published in 1621. Twenty-five years later, Biathanatos,
a landmark treatise about suicide, was published. Its author, poet John Donne,
was also the prominent dean of St. Paul’s Cathedral in London. In Biathanatos,
Donne declared that suicide was, on occasion, justified; certainly, he argued, it
ought to be humanly understandable. It was, for him, personal. “Whensoever any
affliction assails me,” he confessed in the preface to his work, “methinks I have
the keys of my prison in mine own hand, and no remedy presents itself so soon
to my heart as mine own sword.”
Two recent authors of excellent accounts of suicide trace similar patterns in
the changing attitudes and laws in England and the United States. Mark
Williams, in Cry of Pain, reports that in mid-seventeenth-century England fewer
than one in ten suicide verdicts was judged to be non compos mentis, or due to
insanity. By the 1690s that figure had climbed to 30 percent; in 1710 it was 40.
By 1800, essentially all cases of suicide were regarded as being due to insanity.
The Massachusetts Puritans and other early American colonists generally

treated those who killed themselves not only as sinners but also as criminals;
over time, however, public attitudes and laws changed. In the seven decades
from 1730 to 1800, as Howard Kushner has documented in American Suicide,
the Boston Coroners’ Juries made one non compos mentis determination for
every two or three felonious ones. By 1801–1828, the ratio had flipped: there
were two insanity decisions for every one felony suicide; at century’s end, as in
England, non compos mentis was the usual verdict in suicide. (Of historical
interest, the earliest suicide of an English settler in Massachusetts was probably
that of Mayflower passenger Dorothy Bradford, the wife of William Bradford,
who became the governor of Plymouth Colony. Dorothy Bradford, it was said,
“accidentally fell overboard” from the ship and drowned in Cape Cod Harbor;
historian Samuel Eliot Morison and others, however, believe that her death was a
deliberate act rather than a mischance. Bradford himself does not mention his
wife’s death in his own account of the early colony.)
Most European countries formally decriminalized suicide in the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries, although it remained a crime in England and Wales
until 1961 and in Ireland until 1993. Certainly, public understanding of suicide
has increased over recent years, although not to a degree commensurate with
what has been learned from medical and psychological research. The harshness
of centuries-old views of suicide still touches the present, both in social policy
and in more personal ways. In my copy of the Book of Common Prayer, for
instance, in the small print that precedes the burial rites—a service that is at once
of such consolation and ancient familiarity: “I am the resurrection and the life.…
O death, where is thy sting?”—there is a damning reminder of archaic taboos
and exclusions: the Order for the Burial of the Dead, the prayer book clearly
states, “is not to be used for any that die unbaptized, or excommunicate, or have
laid violent hands upon themselves.”
HISTORY HAS reflected in its laws and attitudes at least a measure of the complexity of
suicide. An act against the self, suicide is also a violent force in the lives of
others. It is incomprehensible when it kills the young; it is awful in the old,
inexplicable in the physically healthy or the successful, and too glibly explained
away in the sick or failed. There are no simple theories for suicide, nor are there
invariable algorithms with which to predict it; certainly, no one has ever found a
way to heal the hearts or settle the minds of those left behind in its dreadful
wake. What we do not know kills.
Yet we know a mastodonic amount about suicide.
We know, for example, a great deal about the underlying conditions that

predispose an individual to kill himself—heredity, severe mental illness, an
impulsive or violent temperament—and we know, too, that there are some events
or circumstances in life that interact in a particularly deadly way with these
predisposing vulnerabilities: romantic failures or upheavals; economic and job
setbacks; confrontations with the law; terminal or debilitating illnesses;
situations that cause great shame, or are perceived as such; the injudicious use of
alcohol or drugs. We have much knowledge, as well, about who commits
suicide: the most vulnerable age groups and the social backgrounds and gender
of those most at risk; and we know, too, about the hows and wheres and whens of
suicide: the methods used; the places, times, and seasons chosen.
But we are less certain of why people kill themselves. Psychological states,
complex motives, and subtle biological differences are difficult enough to
ascertain in the living; determining their existence, or the role they may play in
those who die by suicide, is something else again. Inevitably, the research
literature on suicide reflects the complexities, inconsistencies, and shortcomings
in our understanding. It also reflects centuries of attempts to explain the
incomprehensible act of self-murder. No one who has had close experience of
this literature—the fifteen thousand scientific and clinical papers in the last thirty
years alone, as well as the hundreds of books and monographs—can come away
from it unimpressed by its depth and breadth of knowledge. No single book, or
five, could capture the best of the historical literature or the most exciting of the
new scientific and psychological studies.
I wrote Night Falls Fast with an awareness of these realities and a tremendous
respect for the work done by earlier writers and researchers. My hope was to
find a way to maintain an individual perspective—through an emphasis on the
psychology of suicide and an extensive use of the words and experiences of
those who seriously attempted to, or eventually did, kill themselves—but to keep
that individual perspective firmly grounded in the sciences of psychopathology,
genetics, psychopharmacology, and neurobiology. It is easy to become so
focused on individual lives and deaths that one loses sight of the extraordinary
scientific and medical advances of recent years—advances that can alleviate
great suffering and save lives. Likewise, it is hard not to get so swept up in the
excitement of gene hunting, brain imaging, and serotonin pathways that one
forgets, as English poet and critic A. Alvarez has put it, that suicide is not only a
“desperately sensitive and confused subject,” it is also a problem “to be felt in
the nerves and the senses.”
It should not be necessary, at the end of a century so rich in literature,
medicine, psychology, and science, to draw arbitrary lines in the sand between
humanism and individual complexities, on the one hand, and clinical or

scientific understandings, on the other. That they are bound and beholden to each
other should be obvious. Yet it is undeniable that Maginot Lines exist. For many,
the aesthetics of complexity—the singular appeal of psychological case histories,
especially ones laced with sociological and cultural explanations—are far more
compelling than statistical findings obtained from coroners’ reports or DNA gels.
But such a focus on psychological complexity, at the expense of
understanding psychopathological, genetic, or other biological factors, is as
certain to fail as any consideration of biological causations and treatment that
does not take into account the range of individual differences in experience,
behavior, ability, and temperament. For those whose primary interests are in the
arts and humanities, it will almost always be more intriguing to read about
psychological conflicts or social determinants of suicide—and certainly, such
matters are crucial to the understanding of suicide—but these factors alone may
not be terribly helpful in predicting or preventing unnecessary early death in
others.
Suicide as an existential issue is a core problem for philosophers, writers, and
theologians; it is an issue of importance for most of us, whatever we do or do not
believe. (Albert Camus, for one, believed that “Judging whether life is or is not
worth living amounts to answering the fundamental question of philosophy.”)
But this book, although centrally concerned with the psychology of suicide, is
also about suicide as a medical and social problem. Specifically, it is about why
suicide occurs, why it is one of our most significant health problems, and how it
can be prevented.
The book’s focus is on suicide in those younger than forty, but this is in no
way meant to downplay the terrible problem of suicide in those who are older.
Study after study has shown that the elderly are inadequately treated for
depression—the major cause of suicide in all age groups—and that suicide rates
in the elderly are alarmingly high. Suicide in the older age groups is a topic for a
book in its own right, however, and many of the issues raised in the context of
geriatric suicide—“rational” suicide and physician-assisted suicide, especially
within the context of disabling or life-threatening illness—are much less relevant
to those who are younger.
Suicide in the young, which has at least tripled over the past forty-five years,
is, without argument, one of our most serious public health problems. Suicide is
the third leading cause of death in young people in the United States and the
second for college students. The 1995 National College Health Risk Behavior
Survey, conducted by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, found that
one in ten college students had seriously considered suicide during the year prior
to the survey; most had gone so far as to draw up a plan.

The figures for high school students surveyed in 1997 are even more
worrying. One in five high school students said he or she had seriously
considered suicide during the preceding year, and most of them had drawn up a
suicide plan. Nearly one student in ten actually attempted suicide during the
twelve-month period. One out of three of the suicide attempts was serious
enough to require medical attention. These 1997 figures for high school students
are substantially the same as those reported for high school students in 1995 and
1993.
Clearly, there is a difference between reporting the presence of suicidal
thoughts or plans and actually attempting suicide; so, too, there is a crucial
difference between attempting suicide and dying by it. Still, a suicide attempt
remains the single best predictor of suicide, and these figures are reason for
grave concern. Suicide, by any reckoning, is a major killer of the young.
Perhaps the magnitude of suicide in the young can best be illustrated by
comparing the number of deaths from suicide with those from two other highly
publicized causes of death in young men in the United States during the past
forty years: the Vietnam War and the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(HIV/AIDS) epidemic. I have graphed the number of deaths, in males under the
age of thirty-five, for each of these three causes (see opposite page). Each—
suicide, war, HIV/AIDS—has disproportionately killed young men. Obviously,
any kind of death in this age group is terrible, whether it is from war, disease, or
one’s own hand. The Vietnam War took an appalling toll, but after twelve years
it was over. A direct comparison of American male war deaths under the age of
thirty-five during the official years of the Vietnam War, 1961–1973, with
American deaths from suicide in the same age group, during the same time
period, shows that there were almost twice as many suicides (101,732) as war
deaths (54,708). Most Vietnam War–related deaths occurred during only a
portion of those years (1966–1970), however.
A similar comparison of deaths from suicide and HIV/AIDS, carried out for
the ten-year period 1987–1996, shows that almost 15,000 more young men died
from suicide than from AIDS. (Although some patients with AIDS committed
suicide during this period, they were relatively few.) The American HIV/AIDS
epidemic has fortunately become somewhat less lethal in recent years, due to the
availability of combination antiretroviral therapy and public health education
campaigns. (Of interest, the 1995 National College Health Risk Behavior Survey
cited earlier found that one out of two college students received education about
HIV/AIDS prevention but fewer than one in five received information about
suicide prevention.)

Deaths in males (35 years or younger)
Suicide, however, continues unabated, with little evidence of a decline.
Indeed, the sharp increase in suicide in adolescents and young adults since the
mid-1950s is obvious in the graph. So, too, is the cumulative death toll. Possible
reasons for the increase—more accurate ascertainment of suicide deaths by
coroners and medical examiners; an earlier and increased access to particularly
lethal means, such as firearms; a younger age of first alcohol and drug use; an
earlier age of onset of the severe mental illnesses; and increasing rates of
depression—are discussed more extensively later in this book. Thirty thousand
Americans kill themselves every year and nearly half a million make a suicide
attempt medically serious enough to require emergency room treatment.
Wars come and go; epidemics come and go; but suicide, thus far, has stayed.
Why is this, and what can be done about it? These questions are at the heart of
this book: understanding why people kill themselves and determining what
doctors, psychologists, schools and universities, parents, and society can do to

stop it. The public outrage against war deaths and HIV/AIDS has been far more
obvious and effective than the advocacy undertaken on behalf of those who have
died from suicide, but the horror and the despair are no less real.
Suicide is a particularly awful way to die: the mental suffering leading up to it is
usually prolonged, intense, and unpalliated. There is no morphine equivalent to
ease the acute pain, and death not uncommonly is violent and grisly. The
suffering of the suicidal is private and inexpressible, leaving family members,
friends, and colleagues to deal with an almost unfathomable kind of loss, as well
as guilt. Suicide carries in its aftermath a level of confusion and devastation that
is, for the most part, beyond description.
The same Anglican Prayer Book that excludes from its final rites those who
commit suicide speaks elsewhere of a “peace which the world cannot give.” It is
this peace that lies beyond the suicidal mind. In The Anatomy of Melancholy,
Robert Burton wrote:
There is … in this [melancholic] humour, the very seeds of fire.… In
the day-time they are affrighted still by some terrible object, and torn
in pieces with suspicion, fear, sorrow, discontents, cares, shame,
anguish, etc., as so many wild horses, that they cannot be quiet an
hour, a minute of time, but even against their wills they are intent, and
still thinking of it, they cannot forget it, it grinds their souls day and
night, they are perpetually tormented.… In the midst of these squalid,
ugly, and such irksome days, they seek at last, finding no comfort, no
remedy in this wretched life, to be eased of all by death … to be their
own butchers, and execute themselves.
It is possible, with what we now know, to provide both comfort and remedy to
stop at least some of the butchery. Most suicides, although by no means all, can
be prevented. The breach between what we know and do is lethal.

CHAPTER 2
To Measure the Heart’s Turbulence
—DEFINITIONS AND MAGNITUDES—
What a job is this, to measure
lightning with a footrule, the heart’s
turbulence with a pair of callipers.
—NORMAN MACCAIG
ONE WOULD not expect it to be easy to define or classify suicide, and it is not. Death
by one’s own hand is far too much a final gathering of unknown motives,
complex psychologies, and uncertain circumstance—and it insinuates itself far
too corrosively into the rights and fears and despairs of the living—for the
definition of suicide to stay locked within the crisp categories chipped out by
scientists or for it to adhere to the abstruse elaborations spun out by linguists and
philosophers. Yet however permeable its edges, it remains important, as Henry
Romilly Fedden observed in 1938, “to discover the elusive boundaries of
suicide.” The Indian widow dying on her husband’s pyre is not, as he put it, “to
be linked with the lonely individual strung up in his garret.”
The early Greeks used highly active, decisive language to portray the act of
suicide. To kill oneself was “to break up life,” “to grasp or seize death,” “to do
violence to oneself,” “to leave the light,” or to commit “self-slaughter.” But the
Greeks, in giving words to the act, did not so much define as describe it.
Centuries of books and scholarly papers later, the definitions and classification
systems for suicide remain diverse, controversial, and subject to ongoing
reinvention. Inevitably, a certain intellectual paralysis sets in after reading the
hundreds of finely tuned medical, philosophical, and sociological attempts to
classify suicide.
All suicide classification and nomenclature systems are, to a greater or lesser
extent, flawed; and all, or almost all, have points that are well or uniquely taken.
For clarity’s sake and consistency, I have adopted the criteria developed by the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (an agency of the United States

Public Health Service in Atlanta) for the certification of a death as suicide,
criteria that are used by scientists and public health officials, as well as by
medical examiners and coroners. Suicide is defined, succinctly, as a “death from
injury, poisoning, or suffocation where there is evidence (either explicit or
implicit) that the injury was self-inflicted and that the decedent intended to kill
himself/herself.” The World Health Organization, whose even simpler definition
underlies many of the international studies of suicide, defines suicide as “a
suicidal act with a fatal outcome,” where a suicidal act is defined as “self-injury
with varying degrees of lethal intent.”
Society, medical science, and family members require accuracy in determining
whether an unnatural death is an accident, murder, or suicide. Families need to
know the truth about suicide, as best as that truth can be known, so that they can
come to terms with it and so that they can have available to them medical and
genetic information that may be important in making treatment decisions about
other close blood relatives. Legal and financial issues may be at stake as well,
such as property rights, mental competency determinations in disputed estates,
life insurance policies, pensions, workers’ compensation, medical malpractice
suits, and product liability claims. Accurate suicide statistics are also essential
for public health investigators, whose responsibility it is to track trends and
correlates of death and disease. (Earlier estimates suggested that suicide rates,
based upon information from coroners and medical examiners, were
underreported by as much as 25 to 50 percent; more recent studies indicate that
the underreporting is now probably less than 10 percent).
It is not always difficult to determine that suicide has occurred. Many
instances are unequivocal: a gun is nearby, distinctive powder marks are found, a
note has been written, and a psychiatric history or previous suicide attempt is
documented. At other times, however, evidence must be pieced together—from
autopsy findings, toxicology studies, psychological investigations, and
statements from the deceased’s family members, or witnesses to the death—to
establish that death was, in fact, self-inflicted. Intent must also be established.
Most medical examiners and coroners use scientific and public health
guidelines that specify that there must be evidence that the decedent intended to
kill himself or herself or wished to die. The evidence may be explicit, that is,
verbal or nonverbal expression of intent to kill oneself, or it may be implicit or
indirect, such as “preparations for death inappropriate to or unexpected in the
context of the decedent’s life; an expression of farewell or the desire to die or an
acknowledgment of impending death; expression of hopelessness; expression of
great emotional or physical pain or distress; effort to procure or learn about
means of death or to rehearse fatal behavior; precautions to avoid rescue;

evidence that decedent recognized high potential lethality of means of death;
previous suicide attempt; previous suicide threat; stressful events or significant
losses (actual or threatened); serious depression or mental disorder.”
Medical and psychological criteria can go only so far, of course, and many
other factors influence the accuracy of suicide statistics. The reporting officials,
for example, may be medical examiners who, in addition to being physicians,
also have extensive specialist training in forensic medicine, or they may be
coroners or elected officials; the latter, in particular, may be more swayed by a
family’s religious concerns, potential stigmatization or blame by the community,
and possible financial repercussions to the survivors. Religious background may
also influence the decisions reached by coroners and medical examiners. (In
Canadian studies, for example, fewer suicide judgments were rendered by
Catholic medical examiners than by non-Catholics, suggesting the possibility
that religious views and sanctions continue to play a role in determining whether
some unnatural deaths are designated as suicides or accidents.) Cultural attitudes
and practices also have an impact. In one investigation, Danish coroners, using
the same case material as their English counterparts, assigned a much higher
proportion of equivocal deaths to suicide. Perhaps, as the investigators noted, at
least some of the differences were due to the fact that the determination of cause
of death in Denmark is carried out in a medical rather than a legal context and
that suicide, which was a criminal act in England until 1961, has not been a
criminal offense in Denmark since 1866. Too, the Danes believe that they attach
less stigma than the English to the primary mental illnesses underlying suicide—
depression, manic-depression, and schizophrenia—and therefore to suicide as
well.
The method of dying is also important. Coroners and medical examiners, for
instance, tend to view hanging as an almost certain indicator of suicide; this is
also true when death has resulted from carbon monoxide poisoning from the
exhaust pipe of an automobile, plastic bag asphyxiations, and fatal wrist cuttings
or throat slashings. Drowning deaths are far more debatable, however, as they
may result from suicide, accident, or murder. Indeed, most drownings are
accidental, but investigations may be problematic, as sociologist Maxwell
Atkinson makes clear in this law enforcement version of “Hearts,” where the
corpse is played as the queen of spades and shuffled from jurisprudence to
jurisprudence:
For just as it is difficult to imagine ways in which people might end up
hanged other than as a result of their own actions, it is very easy to
envisage persons slipping, falling or even being pushed into the water

from which their body is ultimately retrieved. The consequent
difficulty in conducting the investigation and arriving at a definite
verdict may be one of the reasons for a practice reported to me by a
policeman who worked on one bank of a tidal river, which also marked
the border between two police forces. According to him, it was not
uncommon for policemen finding a body washed up on their side of
the river to push it back into the water so that the tide would wash it up
on the other side “so that the other force would have to deal with it.”
The other force, however, presumably with similar thoughts in mind
used to do the same thing, so that a body might float backwards and
forwards several times before it was finally taken in and investigated.
Deaths in single-car accidents, or head-on collisions with a large weight
disparity between vehicles, also lend themselves to equivocal interpretations
about the cause of death, as do some types of pedestrian deaths and deaths
resulting from falls from high places. The most important cause of uncertainty in
death certification, however, because of the large number of cases involved and
the many confounding issues, is self-poisoning or drug overdose. Self-poisoning
deaths—unlike cases of strangulation, drowning, gunshot wounds, or falls from
heights—may not even look like unnatural deaths; as a result, they may not
come to the attention of a coroner or medical examiner. Unless a death is seen as
unexpected (for example, in a young person), an overdose death may be
mistaken for a natural one.
Intent to die is ambiguous in many drug overdose deaths. Mental states may
be clouded by mental illness, especially depression, leading some to take too
many pills by accident; others, not fully intending to die, may underestimate the
lethal strength of a drug or misgauge its potency in combination with alcohol or
other drugs. In these situations, as in other equivocal circumstances surrounding
death, a retrospective examination of the life and death of the decedent, a so-
called psychological autopsy, can provide critical information about intent and
state of mind.
The psychological autopsy is carried out by either an individual or a “Suicide
Team” that conducts extensive interviews with family members, friends,
physicians, and colleagues of the decedent in order to clarify the intent to die (if
any) and the degree to which the death was self-inflicted. This technique was
first used, in a more open-ended and less systematic format, by Gregory
Zilboorg in an early psychoanalytic study of New York City police officers who
had committed suicide. Although developed and most extensively used in the
United States, the psychological autopsy is also utilized by researchers in

Europe, South America, Australia, and Asia. Eli Robins, a psychiatrist at the
Washington University School of Medicine, developed a more standardized
interview format in the 1950s and used it to conduct a retrospective, community-
based investigation of 134 consecutive cases of suicide in St. Louis. The study,
now a classic in psychiatry, remains one of the clearest demonstrations of the
almost ubiquitous presence of mental illness in those who commit suicide.
The psychological autopsy as a method of clinical and scientific investigation
was most vigorously pursued and developed in the late 1950s and early 1960s by
Norman Farberow, Robert Litman, and Edwin Shneidman of the Los Angeles
Suicide Prevention Center, who worked in collaboration with Theodore Curphey,
then chief medical examiner for Los Angeles County. Their “death
investigation,” or psychological autopsy, set as its goal the re-creation of the
mental state of the victim during the time leading up to his or her death.
Members of the Suicide Team interview friends, family members, and doctors of
the victim, covering a comprehensive range of topics: the cause or method of
death; the victim’s medical and psychiatric history; family background; the
personality and lifestyle of the victim, as well as his or her typical patterns of
reaction to stress, emotional upheavals, and “periods of disequilibrium”; upsets,
pressures, tensions, or anticipation of trouble during the days, weeks, and
months preceding death; the role of alcohol or drugs in the lifestyle and death of
the victim; the nature of the victim’s personal relationships; fantasies, dreams,
thoughts, or premonitions relating to death or suicide that the victim may have
expressed; changes in personal or work habits and eating or sexual behavior;
information about upswings, successes, or plans; an assessment of intention; a
rating of the severity of suicidal thinking and behavior; and reactions of those
interviewed to the victim’s death.
From this information and a detailed analysis of the death itself, the Suicide
Team puts together a description of the victim’s last days and then presents its
findings to the coroner or medical examiner. Often, in seemingly equivocal
cases, the recommendation is a persuasive one for a verdict of suicide; in other
instances, however, the evidence leads to a decision for accident. The following
case, illustrative of the kinds of questions asked and the investigative work
involved, is from the files of the Los Angeles Suicide Prevention Center. When
first presented to the Suicide Team, the death appeared to be a suicide; after
completion of the psychological autopsy, however, the team recommended that it
be certified as an accident:
In practically any coroner’s office, a death that results from playing
Russian roulette would automatically be certified as suicide. Indeed,

there is now legal precedent for such certifications. Because of a
special interest on the part of the Suicide Team in this type of death,
this case was turned over to them by the coroner for investigation,
with, as it turned out, extremely surprising results. On the basis of
interviews it was ascertained that the victim, a 28-year-old male, was
an Army veteran who had a collection of revolvers, which he kept in
perfect operating condition. It was determined from his best friend that
the victim’s favorite activity at parties was to play Russian roulette
(following the usual rules of the game by having one chamber of the
cylinder loaded) and that he had done this literally dozens of times in
the preceding few years. At this point, the Suicide Team wondered
about the psychology of a man who would behave in such a fashion:
was he psychotic or was he intent on killing himself? Interviews with
the widow clarified the situation: the victim had told her that there was
no possibility of his hurting himself, as he always glanced at the gun to
ascertain that the bullet was in a nonlethal position before he pulled the
trigger. If the bullet was one notch to the left of the barrel, he would
spin the cylinder again. There had been no suicidal ideation and no
evidence of depression, psychosis, or morbid content of thought. What
had happened? The Suicide Team knew that the death had occurred in
someone else’s home. Interviews developed the information that he
shot himself with a revolver that was not his own but belonged to his
host of the evening. What seemed most important was the fact that,
whereas his collection consisted entirely of Smith and Wesson
revolvers, he had killed himself with a Colt revolver. The actions of
the two guns are different; that is, the cylinder of the Smith and
Wesson revolves clockwise. It was believed that the victim, checking
and seeing the bullet one space to the right of the barrel, thought that
he could not possibly kill himself, whereas in reality pulling the trigger
put the bullet in the lethal position and he died immediately.
In the absence of any indication of suicidal affect or any indications
of suicidal ideation, and with the additional information about the two
types of revolvers, the Suicide Team recommended that this death be
considered as accidental. One member of the Suicide Team labeled this
case as one of Soviet Roulette, that is, Russian roulette in which one
cheats.
The psychological autopsy, in modified and different standardized forms, has
been widely used in suicide research, as well as in coroners’ and medical

examiners’ offices. It has proven especially useful in understanding the extent of
the link between psychopathology and suicide.
SUICIDE IS the anchor point on a continuum of suicidal thoughts and behaviors. This
continuum is one that ranges from risk-taking behaviors at one end, extends
through different degrees and types of suicidal thinking, and ends with suicide
attempts and suicide. Suicide attempts include not only those acts where there is
a clear or likely intent to die but those where there is no intent to die (for
instance, acts where the individual wishes to use the appearance of intending to
kill himself or herself in order to obtain some other end).
Risk-taking behaviors, while important, almost always involve considerable
speculation about underlying intent. They may involve either immediate risk,
such as skydiving, or more remote risk, such as smoking or reckless driving.
These indirect, or “subintentional,” deaths—defined by Shneidman as those “in
which the decedent has played a covert, partial, latent, unconscious role in
hastening his own death”—have come to include, depending on the clinician or
researcher, everything from chronic alcohol or drug abuse or involvement in
high-risk sports, to a variety of other activities, such as having unprotected sex
with partners at high risk for AIDS, handling poisonous snakes, and provoking
rage in those known to be physically violent (so-called victim-precipitated
homicide).
Suicidal ideation, which is to say thinking about suicide, is also a problematic
concept but one that is more amenable to inquiry and measurement. Thoughts
about suicide are relatively common in every age group that has been studied,
but the number of people acknowledging such thoughts varies, of course,
depending on the nature of the questions asked. The time frame strongly affects
the total number of individuals who acknowledge suicidal thoughts or plans:
some studies, for example, inquire only about suicidal thoughts during the past
week; others ask whether such thoughts occurred during the preceding year; and
yet others whether or not the individual has ever, during the course of a lifetime,
had suicidal thoughts. Interviewers also ask about the frequency of suicidal
thoughts—were the thoughts rare, occasional, frequent, daily, several times a
day?—as well as about the severity of intent.
Twenty-five years ago, in an early community-based study of suicidal thinking
and behaviors, University of Cambridge psychiatrist Gene Paykel and his
colleagues interviewed more than 700 people in New Haven, Connecticut. The
results gave a public face to what had been very private thoughts. More than 10
percent of those interviewed said that, at some point in their lives, they had felt

that “life was not worth living,” and a comparable number said that they had, at
one time or another, “wished they were dead.” One person in twenty had thought
about actually taking his or her own life, and most of those who had thought
about suicide had thought about it seriously. One person in a hundred said he or
she had attempted suicide.
Approximately twenty years ago, the National Institute of Mental Health
began the largest study ever undertaken of the nature and extent of psychiatric
disorders in the U.S. population. It involved extensive interviews of a total of
20,000 people living in the five American catchment areas of Baltimore,
Maryland; Piedmont County, North Carolina; Los Angeles, California; New
Haven, Connecticut; and St. Louis, Missouri. The study included four questions
about suicide, similar to those asked by Paykel and his colleagues, but was more
specific in that it required a minimal duration for suicidal thoughts of two weeks.
Of the 18,500 individuals who responded to the questions about suicide, 11
percent said they had at some point during their lives felt so low they had
thought of committing suicide; 3 percent of the total said they had made one or
more suicide attempts. Other investigations conducted in general communities
have found that, consistent with these two studies, between 5 and 15 percent of
the general adult population acknowledge having had suicidal thoughts at some
point in their lives.
College students, asked the same or similar questions, generally report as high
or higher rates. The most comprehensive study of university and college
students, the 1995 National College Health Risk Behavior Survey (the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention study discussed earlier), questioned 4,600
undergraduate college students across the United States. Ten percent of the
students said they had seriously considered attempting suicide during the twelve
months preceding the survey, and 7 percent had actually drawn up a suicide plan.
Other research, conducted in Europe and Africa as well as in the United States,
has shown that mild to severe thoughts of suicide are common, occurring in 20
to 65 percent of college students.
High school students also report disconcertingly high rates of suicidal
thinking. The 1997 Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance Survey, cited in the last
chapter, canvassed more than 16,000 ninth- through twelfth-grade students
(fifteen- to eighteen-year-olds) across the United States. Fully 20 percent, or one
in five, said that they had “seriously considered” attempting suicide in the
preceding twelve months; 16 percent said they had drawn up a plan. Girls were
much more likely to have considered or planned a suicide attempt, and Hispanic
students were more likely than either whites or African Americans to
acknowledge having thought about suicide. Two other studies of American high

school students confirmed that thinking about suicide is far from a rare concern:
more than 50 percent of New York high school students reported that they had
“thought about killing themselves,” and 20 percent of Oregon high school
students described a history of suicidal thinking of varying degrees of severity.
Studies in Europe and other parts of North America report similar findings.
One in twenty French boys fifteen to eighteen years old, and one in ten French
girls of similar age, stated that they had thought about suicide “fairly often, or
very often” during the preceding year. In Canada, one in ten high school students
reported having thought about suicide at least once during the preceding week.
Another Canadian study, carried out in a slightly younger age group (twelve- to
sixteen-year-olds), found that thoughts of suicide almost doubled in girls from
the time they were twelve or thirteen to the time they were between the ages of
fourteen and sixteen (the rates went from 7.5 to 14.5 percent). The boys showed
exactly the opposite pattern, dropping from 6.7 to 3.3 percent in the same age
groups. These differences between the sexes almost certainly reflect, at least to
some extent, the higher rate of depression in girls and women, which is
discussed later in greater detail.
These statistics are disturbing, but it is of further concern that there is a wide
discrepancy between what children report and what their parents actually notice.
In one investigation of suicidal behavior in girls, for example, more than 15
percent of the children reported having had suicidal thoughts or behavior. Very
few of their parents were aware that of their children’s experiences. This same
unawareness of their children’s suicidal thoughts and actions has been found for
the parents of boys as well. Parents also seriously underestimate the extent of
depression in their adolescent children.
It is understandably difficult for parents to believe that young children are in
such pain as to wish to die, yet many children are. Cynthia Pfeffer, a child
psychiatrist at Cornell University, finds that more than 10 percent of a sample of
“normal” schoolchildren, that is, children with no history of psychiatric
symptoms or illness, report suicidal impulses. One of the children in her study, a
ten-year-old girl, described her thinking explicitly and painfully: “I often think
of killing myself. It started when I was almost hit by a car. Now, I want to kill
myself. I think of stabbing myself with a knife. When Mom yells at me, I think
she does not love me. I worry a lot about my family. Mom is always depressed
and sometimes she says she will die soon. My brother becomes very angry, often
for no reason. He tried to kill himself last year and had to go to the hospital.
Mom was in the hospital once also. I worry a lot about my family. I worry that if
something happens to them, no one will take care of me. I feel sad about this.”
Another child, a ten-year-old boy, also described his thoughts both specifically

and graphically: “I want to hurt myself when I get upset and angry. I bang my
head against the wall or punch the wall with my fist. I wish I were dead. I often
think about how to kill myself. I think I will go to France to have myself
guillotined. It would be quick and painless. Guns are too painful, so is stabbing
myself. Once, I put my head into a sink of water and I got scared. My
grandmother found me. I told her I was washing my face. Mom was shocked
when she heard about this. She began to cry. She worries a lot and always seems
sad.”
Most instances of suicidal thought, although often frightening and of concern,
lead to neither a suicide attempt nor suicide, but some do.
The line between suicidal thoughts and action is not as clear as it might seem.
A potentially deadly impulse may be interrupted before it is ever acted upon, or
an attempt with mild intent and danger of death may be carried out in full
expectation of discovery and survival. Often, people want both to live and to die;
ambivalence saturates the suicidal act. Some wish to escape, but only for a
while. A few use suicide threats or attempts to make others “pay” for a slight or
rejection, yet others to provoke change in the decisions and behaviors of people
they know.
Many who attempt suicide later deny or minimize it once the acute crisis or
pain is in the past. Novelist Evelyn Waugh, for instance, suffered two
professional setbacks, scarcely insurmountable critical reviews of his work,
when he was in his early twenties. Desperately unhappy, he decided to end it all.
Years later, in recounting his suicide attempt, Waugh questioned how much of
what he had done was “real” and how much just “play-acting”:
One night … I went down alone to the beach with my thoughts full of
death. I took off my clothes and began swimming out to sea. Did I
really intend to drown myself? That certainly was in my mind and I
left a note with my clothes, the quotation from Euripides about the sea
which washes away all human ills. I went to the trouble of verifying it,
accents and all, from the school text.… At my present age I cannot tell
you how much real despair and act of will, how much play-acting,
prompted the excursion.
It was a beautiful night of a gibbous moon. I swam slowly out but,
long before I reached the point of no return, the Shropshire Lad was
disturbed by a smart on the shoulder. I had run into a jelly-fish. A few
more strokes, a second more painful sting. The placid waters were full
of the creatures.
An omen? A sharp recall to good sense … ?

I turned about, swam back through the track of the moon to the
sands.… As earnest of my intent I had brought no towel. With some
difficulty I dressed and tore into small pieces my pretentious classical
tag, leaving them to the sea, moved on that bleak shore by tides
stronger than any known to Euripides, to perform its lustral office.
Then I climbed the sharp hill that led to all the years ahead.
Waugh was not alone in having had his uncertainties about intent and action.
There is, in fact, no consistent definition of what is meant by a “suicide attempt”;
nor are there universally agreed-upon criteria for distinguishing levels of
determination or for classifying the degrees of medical dangerousness from an
attempt. Many things need to be taken into account by clinicians and researchers
who try to ascertain the seriousness of a person’s will to die or who have to
assess the extent of the medical complications from a suicidal act.
A Suicide Intent Scale was developed by Aaron T. Beck and his colleagues at
the University of Pennsylvania for use with patients who attempt suicide but
survive. The kinds of clinical observations and questions asked—whether or not
the act took place in isolation, the degree of premeditation, the reasons for the
attempt—provide an idea of what clinicians and scientists are interested in when
they look at issues of intent and suicide planning.
Suicide Intent Scale
(for Attempters)
I. Objective Circumstances Related to Suicide Attempt
1. Isolation
0. Somebody present
1. Somebody nearby, or in visual or vocal contact
2. No one nearby or in visual or vocal contact
2. Timing
0. Intervention is probable
1. Intervention is not likely
2. Intervention is highly unlikely
3. Precautions against Discovery/Intervention
0. No precautions
1. Passive precautions (as avoiding others but doing nothing to prevent their

intervention; alone in room with unlocked door) 2. Active precautions (as
locked door)
4. Acting to Get Help During/After Attempt
0. Notified potential helper regarding attempt
1. Contacted but did not specifically notify potential helper regarding
attempt 2. Did not contact or notify potential helper
5. Final Acts in Anticipation of Death (e.g., will, gifts, insurance) 0. None
1. Thought about or made some arrangements
2. Made definite plans or completed arrangements
6. Active Preparation for Attempt
0. None
1. Minimal to moderate
2. Extensive
7. Suicide Note
0. Absence of note
1. Note written, but torn up; note thought about
2. Presence of note
8. Overt Communication of Intent Before the Attempt
0. None
1. Equivocal communication
2. Unequivocal communication
II. Self-Report
9. Alleged Purpose of Attempt
0. To manipulate environment, get attention, revenge
1. Components of “0” and “2”
2. To escape, surcease, solve problems
10. Expectations of Fatality
0. Thought that death was unlikely
1. Thought that death was possible but not probable
2. Thought that death was probable or certain
11. Conception of Method’s Lethality

0. Did less to self than he thought would be lethal
1. Wasn’t sure if what he did would be lethal
2. Equaled or exceeded what he thought would be lethal
12. Seriousness of Attempt
0. Did not seriously attempt to end life
1. Uncertain about seriousness to end life
2. Seriously attempted to end life
13. Attitude Toward Living/Dying
0. Did not want to die
1. Components of “0” and “2”
2. Wanted to die
14. Conception of Medical Rescuability
0. Thought that death would be unlikely if he received medical attention 1.
Was uncertain whether death could be averted by medical attention 2. Was
certain of death even if he received medical attention
15. Degree of Premeditation
0. None; impulsive
1. Suicide contemplated for three hours or less prior to attempt 2. Suicide
contemplated for more than three hours prior to attempt
III. Other Aspects (Not Included in Total Score)
16. Reaction to Attempt
0. Sorry that he made attempt; feels foolish, ashamed (circle which one) 1.
Accepts both attempt and its failure
2. Regrets failure of attempt
17. Visualization of Death
0. Life-after-death, reunion with decedents
1. Never-ending sleep, darkness, end of things
2. No conceptions of or thoughts about death
18. Number of Previous Attempts
0. None
1. One or two

2. Three or more
19. Relationship Between Alcohol Intake and Attempt
0. Some alcohol intake prior to but not related to attempt, reportedly not
enough to impair judgment, reality testing 1. Enough alcohol intake to
impair judgment, reality testing and diminish responsibility 2. Intentional
intake of alcohol in order to facilitate implementation of attempt
20. Relationship Between Drug Intake and Attempt (narcotics, hallucinogens,
etc., when drug is not the method used to suicide) 0. Some drug intake prior to
but not related to attempt, reportedly not enough to impair judgment, reality
testing 1. Enough drug intake to impair judgment, reality testing and diminish
responsibility 2. Intentional drug intake in order to facilitate
implementation of attempt
Note: The responses most indicative of severe suicide intent are highlighted here
in bold print.
Reproduced with permission of Aaron T. Beck, M.D., University Professor of
Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania.
In addition to scales designed to assess the intent to die, there are a number of
clinical and research measures that assess the medical seriousness of a suicide
attempt. Firearms and hanging are likely to kill and hard to reverse, in contrast to
self-poisonings, which are less likely to kill and easier to treat. (Availability and
quality of medical care also affect the potential deadliness of a method. In
developed countries, where access to emergency treatment is more common than
not, death from self-poisoning is less of a risk than in less affluent regions of the
world, where deadly agricultural pesticides are more readily available but
medical care is not.) The actual medical damage sustained from the attempt can
be measured by rating, among other things, the level of consciousness, the extent
of permanent injury caused by the suicide attempt, and the extent and nature of
the medical procedures required (for example, outpatient care only versus
admission to a medical or surgical ward or to an intensive care unit).
Given the disparate views of what constitutes a suicide attempt, it is scarcely
surprising that the reported rates for such attempts vary quite widely. In general,
however—whether the research is carried out in Europe, North America,
Australia, the Mideast, or the Far East—between 1 and 4 percent of all adults
state that they have, at some point in their lives, attempted suicide. Adolescents,

on the other hand, have higher and more variable rates: between 2 and 10
percent of young people across the world state that they have tried to kill
themselves, and a significant number of them report having made more than one
attempt. It is unclear why this discrepancy in suicide attempt rates should exist
between the older and younger age groups, although several explanations have
been suggested.
Myrna Weissman, a psychiatric epidemiologist at Columbia University in
New York, has found compelling evidence of a dramatic doubling or even
tripling of rates of suicide attempts over recent decades. Some of this may be
due to a “cohort effect,” that is, a genuine increase in rates of suicidal behavior
and depression in individuals born in more recent years; this will be discussed
later in more detail. There may also be a tendency to forget or minimize suicide
attempts over time. In one study carried out in Australia, for instance, 40 percent
of those who acknowledged thinking about suicide at one point in their lives,
when asked the same questions four years later denied ever having had such
thoughts. Less severe suicide attempts may be particularly susceptible to
forgetting, and, of course, some of those who attempt suicide when young will
kill themselves before ever reaching adulthood. Too, younger people may simply
be more willing to acknowledge suicidal behavior.
• • •
THE RELATION between suicide attempts and suicide is murky. There are an estimated
ten to twenty-five suicide attempts for every completed suicide. And many, if not
most, people who attempt to kill themselves do so more than once.
Gender certainly plays a role in both suicide attempts and suicide. Women in
the United States are two to three times more likely to attempt suicide than men.
American men, on the other hand, are four times as likely actually to kill
themselves. The reasons for this are complicated and will be dealt with at
different points throughout this book, but part of the discrepancy may be due to
differences in the rates and types of the psychiatric illnesses associated with
suicide and attempted suicide. Women and girls, for example, are at least twice
as likely as men to suffer from depression, which may account for some of the
increase in the rate of suicide attempts. This higher rate of depression in women
has been extensively documented in many studies, including the major
international investigation led by Myrna Weissman. In each of the ten countries
she and her colleagues studied—the United States, Canada, Puerto Rico, France,
West Germany, Italy, Lebanon, Taiwan, Korea, and New Zealand—depressive
illness was far more common in women than men. Rates for manic-depression,

on the other hand, were the same for both sexes.
Although depression is more common in women, their depressive illnesses
may be less impulsive and violent than those of men; this in turn may make
women less likely to use violent methods and more likely to use relatively safer
means such as self-poisoning. There is also evidence that men are more likely
than women to feel there is a stigma attached to a “failed” suicide attempt.
Women also may remember and report the attempts they do make more
accurately.
Men, who may have a more aggressive and volatile component to their
depression, are also less likely to seek medical help for psychiatric problems.
They further add to their suicide risk by using alcohol and drugs and keeping
firearms. (This is not a recent phenomenon, as we shall see later when discussing
suicide methods in more detail. The first edition of the American Journal of
Insanity, published in 1845, reported that more than two-thirds of men who
committed suicide used violent and highly lethal means—firearms, throat
slashing, or hanging—whereas only one-third of the women used such methods.)
The method used in a suicide attempt clearly has a determining power in
whether an individual lives or dies. China, whose citizens accounted for more
than 40 percent of the world’s suicide deaths in 1990, is the only major country
where a comparable number of women and men die by suicide. Although other
social factors certainly play a role, the percentage of the population still living on
the land and the widespread availability of highly lethal pesticides, coupled with
little or no access to emergency medical care, make death from self-poisoning
more likely in China than in the Western nations.
There is a crucial overlap between those who attempt suicide and those who
commit it: long-term (ten- to forty-year) follow-up studies, for example, show
that of those who attempt suicide, 10 to 15 percent will eventually kill
themselves. Predicting who will go on to complete suicide is one of the most
difficult, frustrating, and essential clinical problems that there is. The borders
between thinking, acting, and fatal action are more tenuous, uncertain, and
dangerous than any of us would like to believe; this Robert Lowell captured well
in his final verses from “Suicide”:
Do I deserve credit
for not having tried suicide—
or am I afraid
the exotic act
will make me blunder,
not knowing error

is remedied by practice,
as our first home-photographs,
headless, half-headed, tilting
extinguished by a flashbulb?
Suicide, which kills approximately 30,000 Americans a year, takes a terrible
toll across all continents. A recent World Health Organization report estimates
that suicide was the cause of 1.8 percent of the world’s 54 million deaths in
1998. Suicide figures even more prominently as a cause of death in the young.
The ten leading causes of death for males and females between the ages of
fifteen and forty-four are shown in the graph on the opposite page. Suicide, it
can be seen, is the second major killer of women in this age group and the fourth
major killer of men. By any standards, suicide is a critical public health problem.
During the past half century, rates of suicide in the young have been
increasing throughout the world. The rapid rise, especially in those below the
age of twenty-five, has been a major concern to clinicians, scientists, and public
health officials. British researchers, for instance, surveyed the change in youth
suicide rates in eighteen countries from the early 1960s to the 1970s. There were
significant increases in virtually all of the countries. Researchers at the
Karolinska Institute in Stockholm tracked suicide patterns over a thirty-year
period, from 1952 to 1981, and found that the risk of a twenty-year-old man
committing suicide before the age of twenty-five had increased by 260 percent.
In the United States, between 1980 and 1992, the rate of suicide in children
aged ten to fourteen increased by 120 percent. In 1995, more teenagers and
young adults died from suicide than died from cancer, heart disease, AIDS,
pneumonia, influenza, birth defects, and stroke combined. There are, as
Maryland’s chief medical examiner has put it, “too many, too young.” The strong
trend toward higher suicide rates at earlier ages, a trend found by many other
groups of scientists, has provoked a great deal of speculation and research about
why this should be so.

Leading causes of death in females and males, worldwide, ages 15–44
Some of the increase may be due simply to more accurate reporting of suicide;
that is, coroners and medical examiners are now more correctly attributing some
violent teen deaths to suicide rather than classifying them as accidents or
equivocal deaths. Easier and earlier access to firearms, alcohol, and drugs almost
certainly contribute to the higher rates, making those who are vulnerable to
suicide yet more so. There is, as well, some suggestion that neurological damage
to the fetus from nutritional deficiencies or alcohol, nicotine, or cocaine use in
pregnant mothers may result in more children with the mood and behavior
patterns that are associated with suicide. (American and Finnish studies

published in 1999 found, for example, that mothers who smoke during
pregnancy increase the chances of violence, impulsivity, and addictive disorders
in their children.) Likewise, premature babies who once would have died are
now surviving longer, and it is possible that their nervous systems may have
been made more vulnerable as a result of their very low birth weight. Yet another
possible reason for the increase in the number of suicides is that the success of
psychiatric medications has allowed many individuals who have mental illness
to marry and have children who would not have done so in earlier times, and this
may have contributed to an increase in the kinds of psychiatric illnesses
(depression, manic-depression, and schizophrenia) that carry with them an
increased rate of suicide.
One of the most commonly proposed explanations for the increasing rate of
youth suicide, however, is the observation that the average age of puberty has
decreased sharply over the last several decades; perhaps related to this is the fact
that the age at which depression first occurs has also decreased. There is
additional evidence that the actual rates of depression may have increased over
time.
Because depression and other forms of mental illness are at the heart of many
suicides, it is to these disorders of terrible despair, confusion, hopelessness, and
reckless impulse that we now turn.

THIS LIFE, THIS DEATH
A lonely impulse of delight
Drove to this tumult in the clouds;
I balanced all, brought all to mind,
The years to come seemed waste of breath,
A waste of breath the years behind
In balance with this life, this death.
—WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS,
“An Irish Airman Foresees His Death”
THERE IS a moment as you watch that your heart stops and you wish you could
return the videotape to its owners and forget what you have seen. You know the
end of the story; you know that what is done is done; and still there is a terrible
sadness in it, more even than you had reckoned on. The tape is difficult to watch,
impossible not to, and dreadful in its foretelling.
The home video, no doubt like a hundred others taken that same day, scopes
across the Rampart mountain range of the Colorado Rockies, which in turn sets
the stage for the manmade jags and triangulars of the buildings of the U.S. Air
Force Academy. Lurching, the camera continues to record landscape and people
and the day’s events, settling at last on the parade ground covered with
squadrons of marching cadets in their dress blue jackets, white pants, white
gloves, and golden sashes. A thousand, or nearly, graduating seniors; all of them,
but one, newly commissioned officers.
The marching ends, and one by one the cadets receive their diplomas, salute,
and return to their seats. Each name, a moment; each brisk salute, an exercise in
pent enthusiasm. Slowly, the camera’s field becomes more focused, more
personal, and a name is called out. It is clear from the crowd’s response—a roar
of appreciation goes up from his classmates—that the young man is immensely
popular; indeed, a fellow cadet has described him as the most respected senior at
the Academy, and his squadron has given him its outstanding leadership award.
The young man takes his diploma, raises gloved hand to hat, and salutes
sharply, quickly. He smiles gloriously, graciously, contagiously, and you begin to
understand the warmth and extent of his classmates’ response.

But it is not at this moment that your heart stops, although a certain
melancholy seeps in. Rather, it is later, after all the names have been called, all
the salutes given and received. For the moment, the martial measures of the Air
Force song pound out across the parade field and stadium, and then, suddenly, a
thousand freshly minted second lieutenants snap their heads back and watch six
F-16s streak overhead in tight formation, the traditional flyover tribute to the
Academy’s new officers. Before the jet contrails begin to fade, total
pandemonium breaks out and hundreds of white hats are flung high into the air,
sailing every which way into the sky, creating a higgledypiggledy of bobbing
specks of white. Cheers and embraces obliterate the remaining shreds of order.
The home video focuses once again on the young man whose slowly
spreading smile had so captivated, whose appearance had evoked such
spontaneous warmth and cheers from his classmates. He, like them, had watched
the jets overhead and flung his hat into the air. But this is the moment that causes
your heart to stop—his face displays a subtle but chilling confusion. He seems
unmoored, not quite sure of what to do next, slightly glassed off from the swirl
around him. It is painful to watch because you know the end of the story, and
almost unbearable because you know that this is in some way the beginning of
that end.
The young man, Drew Sopirak, did not return to the Air Force Academy the
night of his graduation, nor did he receive his officer’s commission. Although he
had dreamed for years of becoming a pilot and had won a highly competitive slot
in flight school, he never received his pilot’s wings. That evening, instead, he
left the celebrations to return to a place in which no one could have imagined
him, the psychiatric ward of a nearby military hospital. There he tried to sort out
the most recent hand he had been dealt. Unlike all previous hands, which had
been flush with love and luck and ability, this one was a nightmare of all things
lost. It was unexpected and, ultimately, unplayable.
Success, it would seem, was not a sufficient teacher. Nor, would it seem, were
remarkably caring friends and family. Drew Sopirak had all these in full
measure. He was, by every account of his friends and instructors, warm,
vivacious, and hugely popular with his peers; a natural leader; “drop-dead
gorgeous”; and a person for whom no one was a stranger. “There was just
something about him,” said one of his friends. “I don’t think anyone could quite
pin it down as to why he was so wonderful—he just was.” He had been
valedictorian of his Wilmington, Delaware, high school; president of both his
junior and senior classes; Homecoming King; captain of his sports teams; and an
engaging “Mole” in a community production of The Wind in the Willows. It was
of little surprise to anyone that Drew was offered appointments to both West

Point and the Air Force Academy. He had been expected to succeed, and he had.
Drew chose the Air Force Academy, an easy decision for an eighteen-year-old
with a passion for all things that fly and a dream and a determination to become
a pilot. Yet within eighteen months of graduating from the Academy, Drew
Sopirak somehow found his life so painful and his future so bleak that he went to
a gun store, bought a .38-caliber revolver, and pulled the trigger. When it
misfired, he pulled the trigger again.
He was twenty-three years old: the way down had been long, and it had been
fast.
Minds of men fashioned a crate of thunder,
Sent it high into the blue;
Hands of men blasted the world asunder;
How they lived God only knew!
Souls of men, dreaming of skies to conquer
Gave us wings, ever to soar!
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Keep the wings level and true.
—“United States Air Force Song”
The Air Force had prepared Drew for many of the things he might expect in
life, but it did not, nor could it, prepare him for madness. So when his mind
snapped, just a few weeks shy of graduation, he had no equivalent of his earlier
survival training to see him through the splintering mania and subsequent,
inevitable flameout. His mind pelted first out of bounds and then out of
commission; it took along with it his dreams and his life. Manic-depressive
illness proved to be an enemy out of range and beyond the usual rules of
engagement.
Drew was to mention later that he had experienced occasional problems with
racing thoughts and periods of depression prior to his first manic episode. But
these he had kept to himself. He was the last person any of his friends would
have expected to become psychotic or to have to be confined to a psychiatric
hospital. The very unexpectedness and the seeming incongruity, however, were
themselves not entirely unexpected, given the nature of the illness that was to
kill Drew. Manic-depressive illness usually strikes young, not uncommonly
during the college years, and not uncommonly in the apparently invincible—the
outgoing, the energetic, the academically successful.

Drew’s own academic work, which had been excellent, began to decline
significantly during his last months at the Air Force Academy. His roommate
noted that at about the same time Drew was making statements “that did not
make a lot of sense,” and his mother became increasingly concerned that he
“sounded paranoid” when she talked to him on the telephone. He was, by his
own report, intensely euphoric, sleeping little, and some nights sleeping not at
all.
In the midst of his sleeplessness, increasingly manic, Drew became convinced
that he had the answers to many or most of the world’s problems and that he was
a messenger of God. He designed a super spacecraft, based less on his
background in aeronautical engineering than on his newly, and delusionally,
acquired understanding of UFOs. The spacecraft, as he drew and described it,
had spinning lights, a mysteriously increasing energy source, “a new kind of
synergy” derived from dry-ice packs and plasma, and a strange force field that
created a flow pulse that would somehow “push” the aircraft. The concepts are
difficult to follow—indeed incoherent, as manic thinking tends to be—but the
notes and drawing clearly had signal importance to Drew as he sketched them
out late in April 1994, in his acutely grandiose and delusional state. Painfully,
there is also a more personal and prophetic sentence, buried and almost lost in
his frenzied notes and sketches: “You will not be happy,” Drew had written to
himself. “You’ll be stressed—about something important.” There is no clue as to
what the source of the stress would be.
Early in June, while in the mountains, he heard the voice of God telling him to
“purify” himself; in response to this commandment, he removed all his clothes
and ran naked through the woods. Later, frightened, confused, and covered with
cuts and bruises, terrified that the world might be ending, he made his way to his
chaplain’s house. The chaplain’s wife put a blanket around him; then, shaken and
very psychotic, he was taken to the Air Force Academy Hospital. Still paranoid
the next morning and agitated that Russian spies at the Academy, having heard
about his superplane, were “out to get him,” he was transferred to Fitzsimons
Army Medical Hospital.
The military physicians who evaluated Drew were psychiatrically thorough,
medically rigorous, and compassionate. His brain was scanned to rule out tumors
or vascular disease that might cause a mania-like syndrome; his urine was
checked for drugs that might cause paranoid, agitated, or manic states;
consultations were obtained from both the departments of neurology and
medicine. The doctors concluded that Drew had an extensive family history of
manic-depressive (bipolar) illness and that he himself had a classic textbook case
of the same disease. They also noted in his medical record that he had many

friends, was a very good student, and had been an excellent cadet. “His past
history,” wrote one of his doctors, “is significant for excelling in any activity that
he became involved in.”
Drew was started on lithium and within two or three days was decidedly
better. By the ninth day of his hospitalization he no longer was delusional,
although at one point he became frightened that the hospital might try to do
surgery on him to “remove important information from his head.” He was able to
attend the graduation ceremonies at the academy but within a few days’ time had
to be air-evacuated for continued treatment at Andrews Air Force Base, near
Washington, D.C.
Prior to his transfer, a medical board comprising three military physicians was
convened. Their final report, written in the impersonal, if necessary, language of
medicine and the military, brought to an end Drew’s plans for the future: his
commission was denied; he lost his slot in flight school; he would be neither an
officer nor a pilot. “This examinee does not meet the medical standards for
commissioning due to a mental disorder with psychotic features,” wrote the
board. The command surgeon agreed, concluding, “I strongly recommend
medical disenrollment in this cadet.” Drew’s active military service was over.
His struggle with mental illness was not.
Drew was hospitalized at Andrews for an additional three weeks. The
admitting physician, who concurred with the earlier diagnosis of bipolar manic-
depressive illness, observed that Drew was still slightly paranoid, anxious, and
“trying very hard to make sense of what had happened to him.” He noted, as
well, Drew’s perfectionism (a characteristic mentioned by many who knew him)
and the fact that Drew felt guilty about the problems he was causing his family
by being ill.
Notes made by the physicians and nurses who treated him throughout his
hospitalization make it clear that Drew was struggling to put back together the
pieces of his life, struggling to piece together the beginnings of a future. He
discussed the possibility of obtaining a Ph.D. in aeronautical engineering,
becoming a teacher, or perhaps, he suggested in a less optimistic mood, working
at the beach. He didn’t know; it was too early to say. He was desperately
concerned about paying off the educational debt he felt he had to the Air Force.
But his immediate goal was to understand his illness and the medication he was
taking to treat it.
Drew’s hospitalization at Andrews was difficult, in part because the
devastating consequences of his illness were beginning to sink in, in part
because it is readily apparent from his medical history that he had a severe form
of manic-depressive illness. On his second day at the hospital, one of the nurses

found him deeply depressed, rocking in a fetal position. He appeared anxious
and stated that he was scared, felt he was being tortured, and was going to die.
He was placed on fifteen-minute checks, which ensured that a member of the
nursing staff would monitor his safety and whereabouts. His moods cycled
rapidly and violently. A few days later, he stated to the other members in his
group therapy session that he had the solutions to all of the world’s problems,
but within a few hours he was tearful and frightened that he could not control his
racing thoughts.
Drew’s condition gradually improved, and early in July he was given a two-
day weekend pass to visit his parents. When he came back to the hospital, he
was angry and agitated at having to return to the ward; he thrashed his arms
about and shouted to the staff, “No! I’m not staying! No!”
Thirty minutes later one of the nurses found him lying in bed, where he stated,
awfully, “I’m all right. It was just so hard to come back.”
Within a few hours, Drew was again agitated. The nurse observed that his face
was flushed and that he was pacing back and forth in the hallway. Within fifteen
minutes he escaped from the hospital—an escape made easier, no doubt, by his
survival training at the Air Force Academy—and was on his way to his parents’
home in Delaware. He crawled in through a back window; his parents found him
the next morning, sleeping in his own bed.
His mother called the hospital to notify it that Drew had been found and that
he was extremely upset by a telephone call he had received. A fellow patient
from his days on the psychiatric ward in Fitzsimons Army Medical Center had
attempted suicide and been rehospitalized. Under the circumstances, Drew’s
parents thought it would be better for him to receive his psychiatric treatment
closer to home.
Drew arrived home in early July 1994, and his parents arranged for him to get
private psychiatric care and counseling. Psychologically shaky for a while, he
continued to be preoccupied with guilt because he had been forced to leave the
Air Force. He made slow but reasonably steady progress, however, and by
midsummer he was feeling better, exercising again, and playing tennis. He had a
brief recurrence of his delusions and a short-lived period of sleeplessness, but he
was definitely better. In November he began seeing a new psychiatrist, who
added an antipsychotic medication to the lithium that Drew already was taking.
Both Drew and his doctor noted a dramatic improvement in Drew’s mood and
thinking, as did his parents.
From late 1994 to August 1995, Drew’s mood remained stable and he
experienced no psychotic symptoms. He worked at a bank twenty hours a week,
was physically active, and talked about going to graduate school. Although he

occasionally expressed a desire to stop taking his medications, in the hope that
he might someday be able to fly airplanes on a civilian basis, he continued to
take his drugs as prescribed.
But Drew’s anger about the stigma he felt about having manic-depressive
illness was intense, and he felt unable to discuss it with his friends or new
acquaintances. “It’s the last thing I want to talk about, but it generally comes up
when meeting new people or out with friends at bars and parties,” he confided to
his psychiatrist. He limited his drinking to one or two beers and found that he
was questioned about why he didn’t drink more. Often asked about why he was
no longer in the Air Force, he was too embarrassed to tell the truth and was
forced to invent alternative explanations.
Friends were aware that Drew did not want to talk about his problems. One,
who went to high school with Drew and described him, as many did, as “Mr.
Everything,” remarked, “He was still funny and willing to have a good time. I
had no idea what he was dealing with inside his head.” Another close friend,
who is still “looking for explanations I don’t even understand,” described a
change in Drew after his return from the Academy. Drew, he said, had been a
loving person, “with a passion for life”; now something had gone wrong; Drew
didn’t want to talk about it; he “kept a lot of secrets.” Still, Drew and his friends
were a close-knit, active group. Together they listened to the music of U2, went
to rock concerts and the beach, played tennis and volleyball and basketball,
yelled exuberantly at ice hockey games, and went to parties in hopes of meeting
new women.
Drew remained deeply troubled, however, and utterly convinced that he had
disappointed those who mattered most to him. “I never saw bitterness from
Drew,” says his mother, “only disappointment and regret. He felt he had let
everyone down, including the younger cadets, his friends and the Air Force. He
was troubled that he could not repay the education he had received. He had a
difficult time explaining why he was living at home. He felt he had followed all
the rules of the Air Force and still this didn’t work out for him. He felt shame at
being sick.” Like many with manic-depressive illness, Drew had conflicted
feelings about his disease. “We told him of all the people who had coped with
bipolar disorder and done well,” his mother explained, but “he never heard it.”
In November 1995 Drew stopped taking his medications and quit his job. For
a brief time, it looked as though things might work out. He and two others went
to the University of Connecticut to visit a friend, and one of them commented,
“Drew was great—meeting people, breaking the hearts of several girls, and
generally being Drew.” But this same friend also noted, “That was the last time I
saw Drew happy.”

Drew deteriorated rapidly. “It was during this time that I found out what Drew
was really going through,” wrote a friend. “We’d talk for hours about his Jesus
sightings, UFO theories, or whatever else he was experiencing. Through all his
depressive episodes, he still maintained a sense of humor.” Another friend
commented on Drew’s desire for privacy: “He came back from the Air Force
broken, I suppose. He was able to hide it pretty well. All I know is that somehow
his wings were clipped, and that I shouldn’t bring it up—he didn’t want to talk
about it. It’s as if he just didn’t want to worry anyone.”
Drew’s losing battle with manic-depressive illness was profoundly disturbing
to the friends who had known, loved, and admired him for so many years. He
had been their leader, a person of strong character, an individual of great
kindness: he was, said one of them, a person who had “a sweet nature and
downright gorgeous looks—a friend we all hope to be, a man who women dream
of, and a man who men admire, respect, and almost always befriended.” To be
privy to such a person’s struggle for sanity was almost unbearably difficult and
distressing to his friends.
Drew was lucky in these friends, and they in him; their reactions to his
sickness are therefore all the more heartbreaking. One who was particularly
close to Drew wrote:
I remember trying to talk to him, but conversations were frightening
and confusing. He often talked in circles or made no sense or
described that his friends were plotting against him. He described to
me in horrid detail what ran through his mind and most of it I choose
not to repeat. I simply do not know if there is a way to repeat the awful
details, and somehow I feel it is my duty still to protect his honor and
his name. He would do the same for me.
After he was diagnosed with Bipolar Disorder and I began to try to
understand the horror in his mind, I knew he might never be the same.
But I did not dream he would commit suicide. It simply did not seem
possible. For months after he was hospitalized, his family and Drew
told no one but family and me. We wanted to protect him, and perhaps
we thought he would get better, and we would never have to speak of
it. But Drew did not get better, and the more time dragged on, the more
I knew he might never recover.
Drew took his lithium on and off, but I think he never really wanted
to believe he needed it. He never wanted to admit it to himself. I think
he thought he could recover. But as the months dragged on, I realized

that this illness had stolen a part of Drew’s soul. It took from him part
of his personality and his love of life. I remember when he was
hospitalized in D.C. and I went to visit him. His mom left to get
dinner, and he laid his head in my lap, curled up in the fetal position. I
saw with my eyes the man’s face I knew as Drew, but my ears heard
another creature. Something else seemed to live in his shell. Someone
other than Drew brought words to his lips or created his awkward,
disturbing actions. As he rubbed his head, as though to bring his
thoughts to some sort of sanity, I looked at him and wondered where
my friend had disappeared to. This monster had taken over. He was
gaunt and had not shaved in weeks. His skin was sallow and his cheeks
sunken; each movement appeared painful. I did not know this person
he had become. The more he talked the more my fear for him grew. I
went home that evening and cried for two hours straight. Never had I
looked horror in the face as I had that evening.
By December, Drew’s condition plummeted. He was increasingly depressed,
and he kept more and more to himself. The packages he received for Christmas
remained wrapped in his room, and he went out with friends only after much
inducement and prodding. Temporary solace was to be found in music and in the
long baths that he took in a desperate attempt to curb his agitation.
By early January 1996, Drew was almost totally withdrawn from everyone.
Finally, he was catatonic in his bed. He was taken by ambulance to a local
hospital, where he was admitted on an emergency, involuntary basis. At the time
of admission he was mute, his eyes were closed, and he was lying inert on a
stretcher. The doctors gave him an antipsychotic drug, which worked rapidly.
Indeed, it worked rapidly enough that the next day he escaped from the locked
ward and made his way home through one of the worst snowstorms on record.
He was taken back to the hospital, where he stayed for another ten days. During
this time his physician noted that Drew showed “some improvement,” although
he was “continuing to struggle with coming to grips with seeing himself as an
individual with an illness.”
Drew’s medical chart paints an unremittingly grim picture. He described
himself as “hopeless” to the admitting nurse. His employment history was
recorded simply as “unemployed—was working in a bank. Graduated from Air
Force Academy.” In just over a year and a half, a young man of great promise
had gone from a world of academics and athletics, officers and gentlemen, to
“unemployed” and “hopeless.” Manic-depression had taken no hostages.
Drew was asked during the hospitalization to describe an ideal scenario for his

life, once he recovered. He emphasized that he wanted no pity and no medicine.
The items he endorsed on a standard psychological test were deeply despairing
in nature: “I am so sad or unhappy that I can’t stand it,” he checked off on the
test form; “I feel I have nothing to look forward to.” He also endorsed the
statement “As I look back on my life, all I can see is a lot of failures” and, most
distressingly, “I have thoughts of killing myself, but I would not carry them out.”
Drew was discharged to outpatient care five days before he committed
suicide. No one knows what he was thinking or feeling during that time, but he
did leave behind scattered notes and journal entries. In them, as his mother put it,
“you can see him slipping away.” The writings are enigmatic, idiosyncratic,
flailing; they are at times cohesive, but more often than not the confounding
presence of psychosis makes itself felt.
He records unusual dreams, coincidences, and events; there is a sense of a
mind trying desperately just to hold on. He mentions falling stars and eagle
dreams, dreams of Hell, hurricanes, lightning, jets, death. His instructions to
himself compel him to relax, pray, tone down, focus, find peace. He is frightened
that his “old beliefs” will come back, and he laments, “I asked God to help me. I
didn’t deserve his help. Because I cursed God before I asked him for help.”
His writings are filled with the sense of a world that is lost, a self that is lost,
and a hope that has been entirely abandoned. He is guilt-stricken for the pain he
feels he has brought upon others, especially his family, and he enumerates at
length the problems he must confront: he must pay off his debts, he has lost his
girlfriend, he must take medication, he must see doctors. He is convinced that
“everyone will label me as having [an] illness until the day I die,” yet he also
states, “No one knows the special experiences I have had—so they won’t hear
what I tell them ever.”
The final entry in his journal reflects this pervasive ambivalence toward his
disease: “Sick or not?—Medicine reduce[s] symptoms but [I] want [to] be
happy.”
In his copy of Moral Issues in Philosophy, an assigned textbook Drew was
reading when he first became ill at the Air Force Academy, different colors of
ink accentuate, underline, and emphasize various phrases and ideas. He
repeatedly circled and underlined the sentence “There is such a thing as life not
worthy to be lived” and underscored yet another sentence, “It is cruel to allow a
human being to linger for months in the last stages of agony.” Chillingly, the last
phrase Drew underlined was “[there is a] moral duty to terminate the life of an
insane person who is suffering from a painful and incurable disease.”
But the souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and no torment

will ever touch them. In the eyes of the foolish they seemed to have
died, and their departure was thought to be an affliction, and their
going from us to be their destruction; but they are at peace.
—WISDOM, 3:1–9, read at Drew’s memorial service
A few days before Drew’s death, two of his closest friends visited him. They
did not know that it was to be for the last time. Only recently released from the
hospital, Drew was, one of them observed, “unshaven, in black from head to toe,
and very sullen. I’m not sure if he had made up his mind by then or not. All I can
tell you is that he didn’t laugh or smile. As [we] left that night, Drew matter-of-
factly said, ‘I love you guys.’ It was quite strange, and I didn’t know how to
respond. Sensing this, he just said again, ‘I really love you guys,’ and shut the
door. As far as I know, that’s the last thing he said to anyone.”
On January 27, Drew Sopirak left his parents’ home in Wilmington and drove
to a gun store. The state of Delaware required no waiting period to purchase
handguns; the clerk sold him a .38-caliber revolver straightaway. A few hours
later, Drew shot and killed himself. The police notified Drew’s parents that his
body had been found inside his jeep at the entrance to the Pennsylvania
Turnpike. He was about forty minutes from home.
“We had been on that turnpike so many times,” said Drew’s mother. “Both our
families live in the Pittsburgh area. That road would have taken him to
grandparents, aunts, uncles, and cousins and his brother at Penn State. He just
never got on it. He must have run out of hope there.”
The family was left to do the unimaginable: identify Drew’s body at the
morgue, notify other family members and friends, plan a funeral and memorial
service, mourn him, miss him.
Drew’s parents and younger brother received an extraordinary number of
condolence letters from Drew’s high school friends and teachers, his fellow
cadets and instructors at the Air Force Academy, and parents of friends. In
reading through them it is striking how many of the letters are in the form of
thank-you letters: thank-yous for his life, his presence, his warmth; appreciation
of his vitality, friendship, and influence.
“I cannot begin to tell you how sad it makes me to know the world is without
one of its great participants,” wrote one friend. He continued, “Ovid once wrote,
‘Welcome this pain, for some day it will be useful to you.’ I don’t know how true
that is for you concerning your loss, but I know that each time I remember Drew
I hurt. What a wonderful gift you gave all of us in Drew. Thank you.”
Another said simply, “May your consolation be that he was truly loved in this

life.” One of Drew’s teachers, an instructor in aeronautical engineering at the Air
Force Academy, wrote, “I never really understood his illness and he never used it
as an excuse. I don’t remember the names of most of the hundreds of students I
had in my class but a few do stand out. Drew was a stand out guy. Drew made a
difference. Drew mattered. I am proud to have known him.”
Consolations were of help, but ultimately it was left to Drew’s family and
friends to attempt to understand why he had done such an incomprehensible,
final thing. One friend tried:
I do not often say this, but after seeing his suffering for so long, I can
see how suicide cured Drew’s pain. I am not angry for his decision as I
am not sure I would have had the strength to continue as long as Drew
did. Many did not know his suffering, and he let few close enough to
see it. But those of us who loved him and saw his pain do not fault him
for leaving this life behind. Still I hate his illness and still I wish I
could hear, if just for one last time, his jeep roar up to my house with
U2 blaring and see him jump out suntanned and gorgeous and wanting
to go for a ride in the valley.
I will never be the same. As I said before, none of us who know him
ever will. But I know I have been blessed to have known a soul such as
Drew. This is a gift few are given.
Drew’s family, whose warmth and understanding of him would have been, in
a fairer world, more than sufficient to keep him alive, could not compete with a
relentless and ruinous disease. Their funeral notes for Drew end with a
perceptive, straightforward statement of fact: “On January 27, 1996 Drew took
his life. He had stopped taking his medication. His illness moved faster than his
acceptance of it.”
The Christmas before Drew graduated from the Academy, he had placed a
small gift for his parents under the Christmas tree; it was the last package to be
unwrapped. Inside the box they found a pair of lieutenant’s epaulets, which he
asked them to pin on his shoulders when he received his officer’s commission in
six months’ time. All the cadets in his squadron received their commissions and
epaulets in June. All except Drew.
His parents remedied this by placing the unworn epaulets in his hands the day
that they buried him.
And He will raise you up on eagle’s wings,
Bear you on the breath of dawn,

Make you to shine like the sun,
And hold you in the palm of His hand.
You need not fear the terror of the night.
The February day of Drew’s memorial service at the Air Force Academy was
a beautiful, breezy, and sunny one. The flags at the Academy flew at half-mast,
and the chapel was filled with young men and women in uniform. They stood, as
one, for the opening hymn, “On Eagle’s Wings,” and listened to their fellow
officers and cadets read passages from the Old and New Testaments. The
chaplain spoke of Drew’s leadership and of how he had been a role model for so
many in his class. With obvious emotion, he remarked, “I don’t think we know
how much pain, how much turmoil, how much anguish Drew experienced as a
result of his illness.”
Five cadets and officers—sad, young, sober, stricken—went, in turn, to the
pulpit to deliver their remembrances. One second lieutenant, a close friend of
Drew’s, was painfully eloquent: “This chapel,” he said, “means a lot to my life.
Six years ago I walked in those doors scared as a new basic. A year and a half
ago, I walked out of those doors happy as a newly married man. Today, I return
to this place sad, as I must say good-bye to a friend.”
The young officer paused, his sadness palpable. Then he ended his eulogy
with an Air Force pilots’ toast that he, Drew, and their fellow cadets had made
the night they received their class rings from the Academy. Proposed at the time
to the legendary flier and commander of the U.S. air forces in World War I,
General Billy Mitchell, the lieutenant now used it to bid farewell to his friend:
As we soar among them there,
We’re sure to hear his plea,
To take care my friend,
Watch your six,
And do one more roll … 
Just for me.
The congregation rose for the final hymn. “We will run and not grow weary,”
they sang, “For our God will be our strength, / And we will fly like the eagle, /
We will rise again.” One by one the young men and women in blue left the
jagged triangular chapel.
Their leaving is the last thing you see on the home videotape; there is a
terrible sadness in it, even more than you had reckoned on. The only thing that

goes through your mind is what you heard a military chaplain say, many years
ago:
“I do not know why young men have to die. You would think it would break
the heart of God.”

II
Just Hope Has Gone
—PSYCHOLOGY AND PSYCHOPATHOLOGY—
Hope now,—not health, nor cheerfulness,
Since they can come and go again,
As often one brief hour witnesses,—
Just hope has gone forever.
—EDWARD THOMAS
Poet Edward Thomas (1878–1917) was twenty-nine years old when he
wrote to his wife: “I sat thinking about ways of killing myself. My revolver
has only one bullet left. I couldn’t hang myself: and though I imagined
myself cutting my throat with a razor on Wheatham I had not the energy to
go. Then I went out and thought what effects my suicide would have. I
don’t think I mind them.… These thoughts have come to me at least once a
week for three or four years now and frequently during the last seven—”

CHAPTER 3
Take Off the Amber, Put Out the Lamp
—THE PSYCHOLOGY OF SUICIDE—
It is time to take off the amber
Time to change the words,
Time to put out the lamp
Above the door …
—MARINA TSVETAEVA
The young boy scrawled a note and pinned it to his shirt. Then he walked to the
far side of the family Christmas tree and hanged himself from a ceiling beam.
The note was short—“Merry Christmas”—and his parents never forgot or
understood it.
EACH WAY to suicide is its own: intensely private, unknowable, and terrible. Suicide
will have seemed to its perpetrator the last and best of bad possibilities, and any
attempt by the living to chart this final terrain of a life can be only a sketch,
maddeningly incomplete.
We are left with little, as friends or family, as clinicians or scientists: only last
bits of conversations; memories of perfectly normal and now suspect behaviors;
an occasional note or journal entry; recollections of our own dealings with the
dead, fragments we distort through guilt or anger or terrible loss. We are left to
make sense of a young boy’s Christmas note; a mother of three, whose computer
screen reads, “I love you. I’m sorry. Study Hard”; a successful businessman who
jumps in front of a subway train; a brilliant graduate student who kills himself
with cyanide from his laboratory; a promising fifteen-year-old African-American
boy who provokes his own death by aiming a toy gun at a police officer.
There are sharp limits on our understanding: final signs and messages are
subject to a score of readings; and life, once jugulated, cannot be put back in. No
matter how much we may wish to reassemble the suicide’s psychological world,

any light we gain is indirect and insufficient: the privacy of the mind is an
impermeable barrier. Everyone has good cause for suicide, or at least it seems
that way to those who search for it. And most will have yet better grounds to
stay alive, thus complicating everything.
Suicide is not entirely a private act, however; nor is it completely
idiosyncratic or unpredictable. We have ways of understanding the psychological
underpinnings of suicide, and while they may not provide the final clarity we
would like, they give us grounds for a beginning.
Suicide notes—an obvious starting point—often promise more than they
deliver. It would seem that nothing could be closer to the truth of suicide than
notes and letters left behind by those who kill themselves, but this is not the
case; our expectations of how we think people should feel and act facing their
own deaths are greater than the reality of what they do and why they do it.
Suicide authority Ed Shneidman, for example, in commenting on the
disappointing banality of many suicide notes, lets slip his hope, a common one,
that the last recorded moments of life will afford a deep or tragic view of dying:
“Suicide notes,” he writes, “often seem like parodies of the postcards sent home
from the Grand Canyon, the catacombs or the pyramids—essentially pro forma,
not at all reflecting the grandeur of the scene being described or the depth of
human emotion that one might expect to be engendered by the situation.”
But of course one could argue that most people who decide to take their own
lives have lost their ability to feel things grandly or deeply, to reflect profoundly
or originally, to see the world other than monochromatically. Giving words to
ultimate, dark, and interior acts is difficult enough for those with keen minds in
active gear; for those depressed, confused, hopeless, and mentally constricted,
eloquence is unlikely to be much in evidence. When eloquence or pithy insights
do find their way into suicide notes, they are quoted repeatedly, precisely
because of their singular view into the suicidal mind. These notes may be
forceful, riveting, or mordantly amusing, but they tend not to be typical.
In fact, few people leave suicide notes. Perhaps one in four does, and it is
unclear if these notes represent the emotional states, motivations, and
experiences of those who leave behind no written record.
Four thousand years ago, an Egyptian wrote out his despair onto papyrus in
the form of a narrative and four short-versed poems. This document, now in the
Berlin Museum, is thought by British psychiatrist Chris Thomas to be the first
suicide note extant, and he believes it reflects the ruminations of a deeply
depressed, probably psychotic mind. In the second of the four poems the ancient
writer gives vent to his misery in the images of his time:

Lo, my name is abhorred,
Lo, more than the odour of carrion
On summer days when the sky is hot.
Lo, my name is abhorred,
Lo, more than the odour of crocodiles,
More than sitting under the bank of crocodiles.
Lo, my name is abhorred,
Lo, more than a woman
Against whom a lie is told her husband.
Later, he moves from the pain of his existence to the attractions of death:
Death is before me today
As the odour of myrrh,
As when one sitteth under the sail on a windy day.
Death is before me today
As the odour of lotus flowers,
As when one sitteth on the shore of drunkenness.
Death is before me today
As a man longs to see his house
When he has spent years in captivity.
Suicide notes have been written since, in ink, paint, pencil, crayon, or blood.
French artist Jules Pascin, for instance, slit his wrists, wrote a brief note in blood
—“Lucy, pardonnez-moi”—and then hanged himself. Russian poet Sergei
Esenin, who was just thirty when he hanged himself from the heating pipes in
the ceiling of his room—a room left in total disarray, with things thrown about
and bits of torn-up manuscripts strewn everywhere—wrote an entire poem in his
own blood the day before he killed himself:
Goodbye, my friend, goodbye.
My dear, you are in my heart.
Predestined separation
Promises a future meeting.
Goodbye, my friend, without handshake and words,

Do not grieve and sadden your brow,—
In this life there’s nothing new in dying,
But nor, of course, is living any newer.
Most notes are not so dramatically drafted. Some note writers, despite being
poets, use the words of others. Paul Celan, for example, underlined a sentence
from a biography of Hölderlin—“Sometimes this genius goes dark and sinks
down into the bitter well of his heart”—and then drowned himself in the Seine.
Others leave a more extensive record of their thoughts. Cesare Pavese’s diary
from the last year of his life is an unbounded history of pain. “The cadence of
suffering has begun,” he wrote. “Every evening at dusk, my heart constricts until
night comes.” Then, later, not long before he killed himself, he wrote, “Now
even the morning is filled with pain.”
The length of suicide notes varies greatly. Ian O’Donnell at the University of
Oxford and his colleagues looked at suicide notes written by people who killed
themselves on the London Underground railway system and found that the notes
ranged in length from one that was only seventeen words long, written on the
back of a railway ticket, to an eight-hundred-word “stream-of-consciousness
essay written over the course of an hour sitting on a bench in the railway station
and ending with a description of the last few steps towards the railway line and
the final preparations for the arrival of the train.” The average number of words
in their series of suicide notes was about the same as the number of words in this
paragraph.
Many suicide notes are short and may give only an explicit warning to those
who are likely to find the bodies: “BE CAREFUL. CYANIDE GAS IS IN THIS BATHROOM,” for example; or “DO NOT
ENTER. Call Paramedics.” Specific instructions or requests are common, most often
detailing how to handle the body, what to tell children or parents about the
suicide, how to distribute assets, what to do with a cat or a dog. The reasons
given for suicide are often vague and allude to a cumulative pain and weariness
—“I could not bear it any longer”; “I am tired of living”; “There is no point in
going on”—without going into any further details. Young children are less
specific than older adolescents or adults in their reasons for suicide and in what
they wish to have done with their bodies and possessions. Both of the younger
age groups are less likely than adults to leave notes, but they frequently and
explicitly try to relieve their parents, brothers, and sisters of feeling guilty about
their suicides. A twenty-year-old girl who jumped from an office building, for
instance, wrote, “No one is to blame for my doing this. It’s just that I could never
become reconciled with life itself. God have mercy on my soul.”
The majority of all suicide notes are positive in their remarks about those they

are leaving behind. Hostility, when it does occur, however, can be breathtaking.
A man whose wife had fallen in love with his brother put a gas tube into his
mouth; before he died, he wrote out a note for his wife: “I used to love you, but I
die hating you and my brother, too.” On the back of her photograph, he wrote, “I
present this picture of another woman—the girl I thought I married, may you
always remember I loved you once but died hating you.” Similarly hostile
sentiments were left in another person’s suicide note: “I hate you and all of your
family and I hope you never have a piece [sic] of mind. I hope I haunt this house
as long as you live here and I wish you all the bad luck in the world.”
Fortunately, these acid notes are unusual.
Suicide notes in general have a concrete, stereotypic quality to them. In a
series of studies, genuine suicide notes were compared with simulated ones. The
latter were written by individuals (matched for age, gender, and socioeconomic
status) who had been asked to write suicide notes as they imagined they would
write them if they were planning to commit suicide. The genuine suicide notes
were much more specific about giving directives concerning property
distribution and insurance policies; more concerned about the pain and suffering
they knew would be caused by their acts; more neutral in tone, although also
more likely to express psychological pain; and more likely to use the word
“love” in their texts. The simulated notes, on the other hand, gave greater detail
about the circumstances and thoughts leading up to the (imagined) suicide; more
often mentioned the act of suicide itself; and more often used euphemistic
phrases for death and suicide.
Even in the midst of great mental suffering, some people before they kill
themselves find time to lay out quite explicit instructions to their survivors.
Before killing herself with gas from the stove in her kitchen, for example, a
fourteen-year-old girl wrote this note:
To whom it may concern,
If I should die in my childhood, this is my will. I have no money,
except $2.95 in the bank, and a little in defense stamps. This is to be
given to Robert C——, my nephew. My clothing goes to charity or to
anyone that wants them.
If I am laid out I would like to be dressed in blue. If I have a funeral
all friends and relatives are invited to attend.
To my mother I give all I have and everything I possess. To my
father and sister all my love and all I possess.
No one has killed me. I wish to die. I have committed suicide.

In 1931, a twenty-five-year-old man who was out of work and despondent
about his young wife (whom he had pressured into prostitution so they might
live) swallowed poison and died. His suicide note read, in part:
Dear Dear Betty
Oh how I love you but I am not fit to be your husband or live. I have
just gotten the most Deadly Poison there is & When you read this letter
I will be gone thank God. I am giving Peggy [their dog] to the
Landlady to keep for you and one Dollar to feed her to Thursday &
also just Paid the room Thursday. The receipt is enclosed.
I am also bringing over to the Detention home $23.00 in Cash, your
ring, my ring & my watch for them to give you when you get out. I told
the Landlady I would not be here this week but probably you would be
here Monday, if you are not here I gave her the Attorney’s phone
number & told her to ask him to see you & let her know what you want
done with the things.
I am also writing him a letter & telling him of the money & rings
that I am bring [sic] over to you & I am also giving him orders to send
you out home or back to my mother which ever place you want to go.
A quite different kind of instruction and declaration was left in the mid-
nineteenth century by an Englishman being held in county jail for indebtedness.
Convinced he was the co-Deity, a son of God, and Elijah, and allowed access to
his razor and knife despite widespread knowledge that he was insane, he was
found dead of self-inflicted wounds to his throat and abdomen. He left behind
letters to the governor of the jail, the coroner, and his wife. The disturbed state of
his mind is apparent, but despite his delusions he managed to request specific
and rational care in how the news of his suicide would be broken to his wife. He
wrote to the governor:
I am known to Mr. Herschell, the chaplain, and I have no doubt he will
take the letter addressed to my wife to her home. I will, however,
express my wish, and leave it perfectly optional with him to comply or
not, as he pleases. I should wish him to ask Dr. Williams to accompany
him, by the eleven o’clock train, to Newham, then take a conveyance
and call on Mrs. Jolly, at Littledean, and request her to accompany
them to my wife at Cinderford. Should she not be at home, she will be
at Drybrook, at my sister’s, whither they must follow, and break the

intelligence to her as gently as they can. I think, when Dr. Herschell
reads my dying affirmation that I am the long-expected Messiah to his
people, he will comply with my request.
His letter to the coroner addressed the inquest he expected would take place
after his death and left even less doubt about his mental state:
On the one hand, you will have the solemn assurance that I am the Son
of God—the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, and on the
other the oppressive, fearful fact, that I died by my own hand. You will
hardly dare bring in a verdict of temporary insanity, because of the
deliberation, forethought, and predetermination in which it was
accomplished, and because my resurrection from the dead at the end of
three days and three nights would manifest such verdict to be an
infamous libel and blasphemy.
Few suicide notes are so overtly peculiar or psychotic; in fact, most reveal
little or no evidence of incoherent or delusional thinking. Yet, as we will see, the
overwhelming majority of suicides are linked to psychiatric illnesses, so it is not
surprising that most of the notes and records left behind reflect the misery,
cumulative despair, and hopelessness of these conditions.
Acute mental illness brings pains and dangers, and there is a chronic distress that
comes from living with it and dreading its return. The anguish of depression,
manic-depression, schizophrenia, and the other major psychiatric disorders
cannot be overstated. Suffering, hopelessness, agitation, and shame mix together
with a painful awareness of the often irreversible damage done by the illness to
friends, family, and careers. It is a lethal mix. One woman wrote in her suicide
note about her unsuccessful struggle with mental illness:
I wish I could explain it so someone could understand it. I’m afraid
it’s something I can’t put into words.
There’s just this heavy, overwhelming despair—dreading everything.
Dreading life. Empty inside, to the point of numbness. It’s like there’s
something already dead inside. My whole being has been pulling back
into that void for months.
Everyone has been so good to me—has tried so hard. I truly wish
that I could be different, for the sake of my family. Hurting my family is

the worst of it, and that guilt has been wrestling with the part of me
that wanted only to disappear.
But there’s some core-level spark of life that just isn’t there. Despite
what’s been said about my having “gotten better” lately—the voice in
my head that’s driving me crazy is louder than ever. It’s way beyond
being reached by anyone or anything, it seems. I can’t bear it any
more. I think there’s something psychologically-twisted—reversed that
has taken over, that I can’t fight any more. I wish that I could
disappear without hurting anyone. I’m sorry.
A forty-two-year-old woman who shot herself left a long note defending her
character and pleading with the press not to sensationalize her death. She was, as
are many with mental illness, concerned about the effects of her illness on
others, in this case on her mother: “I will be of no use to her much longer with
these crazy nerves. No one who has not experienced the utter discouragement of
a nervous collapse is any judge whatever and cannot realize that that alone can
make one wish to die.”
Nineteenth-century British painter Benjamin Haydon turned to Shakespeare
for some of his last words. Agitated and sleepless, with a history of violent
manic-depression, Haydon slashed his throat and then put a bullet through his
head. His journal was left open to the final entry:
21st.—Slept horribly. Prayed in sorrow, and got up in agitation.
22nd.—God forgive me. Amen.
Finis
of
B. R. Haydon
Stretch me no longer on this rough world.—Lear.
“Nerves,” agitation, and discouragement with prolonged mental suffering are
common themes of suicide notes. Japanese writer Ryuunosuke Akutagawa,
paranoid and delusional (believing, among other things, that maggots were in his
food), took an overdose of sleeping pills when he was thirty-five. “The world I
am living in now,” he wrote, “is the icily transparent universe of sickly nerves.…
Of course, I do not want to die, but it is suffering to live.”
James Whale, director of The Invisible Man, Journey’s End, and the classic
Frankenstein films, also spoke of nerves and suffering in his suicide note.

Addressed to ALL I LOVE, he wrote:
Do not grieve for me. My nerves are all shot and for the last year I
have been in agony day and night—except when I sleep with sleeping
pills—and any peace I have by day is when I am drugged by pills.
I have had a wonderful life but it is over and my nerves get worse
and I am afraid they will have to take me away. [He had been
hospitalized for a nervous breakdown and received shock therapy.] So
please forgive me, all those I love and may God forgive me too, but I
cannot bear the agony and it [is] best for everyone this way.…
No one is to blame—I have wonderful friends and they do all they
can for me.… I’ve tried very hard all I know for a year and it gets
worse inside, so please take comfort in knowing I will not suffer
anymore.
Morbidly afraid of water, he then drowned himself in his swimming pool. Not
too far away, consistent with a lifetime of dark humor, he left out a copy of the
book Don’t Go Near the Water.
The awareness of the damage done by severe mental illness—to the individual
himself and to others—and fears that it may return again play a decisive role in
many suicides. Those patients with schizophrenia who are more intelligent and
better educated, for example, who perform better on measures of abstract
reasoning, and who demonstrate greater insight into the nature of their illness,
are more likely to kill themselves. Patients who do well socially and
academically when young and who then are hit by devastating illnesses such as
schizophrenia or manic-depression seem particularly vulnerable to the spectre of
their own mental disintegration and the terror of becoming a chronic patient. For
them and many others there is a terrible loss of dreams and inescapable damage
to friends, family, and self—Randall Jarrell, in describing to his wife the
cumulative effects of his manic-depression, said, “It was so queer … as if the
fairies had stolen me away and left a log in my place”—a sense of being only a
shadow or husk of one’s former self; an unshakable hopelessness; a feeling of
failure and shame; and a terrible anxiety that the illness will return. For others,
the fact that the illness has come back is in itself unendurable; its recurrence
intolerable, one time too many.
Virginia Woolf, who suffered through psychotic manias and depressions,
wrote in the first of two suicide notes to her husband, “I feel certain that I am
going mad again: I feel we can’t go through another of those terrible times. And

I shan’t recover this time. I begin to hear voices, and can’t concentrate. So I am
doing what seems the best thing to do.” Several days later, she wrote again, and
again she blamed her madness for her death:
Dearest,
I want to tell you that you have given me complete happiness. No
one could have done more than you have done. Please believe that.
But I know that I shall never get over this: and I am wasting your
life. It is this madness. Nothing anyone says can persuade me. You can
work, and you will be much better without me. You see I can’t write
this even, which shows I am right. All I want to say is that until this
disease came on we were perfectly happy. It was all due to you. No one
could have been so good as you have been, from the very first day till
now. Everyone knows that.
V.
Will you destroy all my papers?
Woolf then loaded her pockets with heavy stones and walked into the river.
It is tempting when looking at the life of anyone who has committed suicide to
read into the decision to die a vastly complex web of reasons; and, of course,
such complexity is warranted. No one illness or event causes suicide; and
certainly no one knows all, or perhaps even most, of the motivations behind the
killing of the self. But psychopathology is almost always there, and its
deadliness is fierce. Love, success, and friendship are not always enough to
counter the pain and destructiveness of severe mental illness. American artist
Ralph Barton tried to explain this in his suicide note:
Everyone who has known me and who hears of this will have a
different hypothesis to offer to explain why I did it. Practically all of
these hypotheses will be dramatic—and completely wrong. Any sane
doctor knows that the reasons for suicide are invariably
psychopathological. Difficulties in life merely precipitate the event—
and the true suicide type manufactures his own difficulties. I have had
few real difficulties. I have had, on the contrary, an exceptionally
glamorous life—as lives go. And I have had more than my share of
affection and appreciation. The most charming, intelligent, and
important people I have known have liked me—and the list of my

enemies is very flattering to me. I have always had excellent health.
But, since my early childhood, I have suffered with a melancholia
which, in the past five years, has begun to show definite symptoms of
manic-depressive insanity. It has prevented my getting anything like
the full value out of my talents, and, for the past three years, has made
work a torture to do at all. It has made it impossible for me to enjoy
the simple pleasures of life that seem to get other people through. I
have run from wife to wife, from house to house, and from country to
country, in a ridiculous effort to escape from myself. In doing so, I am
very much afraid that I have spread a good deal of unhappiness
among the people who have loved me.
Barton put on his pajamas and a silk dressing gown, got into bed, opened up
his copy of Gray’s Anatomy to an illustration of the human heart, and shot
himself in the head.
DIFFICULTIES IN life merely precipitate a suicide, wrote Barton; they do not cause it.
There is much evidence to support his belief. But which difficulties are most
precipitous? And why? The reversals of fortune, the deaths or divorces that may
be blamed for a suicide are the same disasters and disappointments that attend us
all. Yet few of us kill ourselves in response.
A. Alvarez describes better than anyone the highly personal interpretation
given to events by those who are suicidal: “A suicide’s excuses are mostly
casual. At best they assuage the guilt of the survivors, soothe the tidy-minded
and encourage the sociologists in their endless search for convincing categories
and theories. They are like a trivial border incident which triggers off a major
war. The real motives which impel a man to take his own life are elsewhere; they
belong to the internal world, devious, contradictory, labyrinthine, and mostly out
of sight.”
Each culture has stressed its own motivations for suicide. In classical
antiquity, according to scholar Anton van Hooff, shame, grief, and despair were
the primary reasons for suicide in young Romans. By the nineteenth century,
Bierre de Boismont had classified the causes of nearly five thousand French
suicides and concluded that insanity and alcoholism were the most important,
followed by incurable disease, “sorrow or disappointment,” and “disappointed
love.” Enrico Morselli, surveying European statistics in the last century, noted
that most suicides were attributable to madness; next in order of importance
were “weariness of life,” “passions,” and “vices.” Further down the list, but

compellingly human in its language, was “despair—unknown and diverse.”
The twentieth century has added specificity, although perhaps not eloquence,
to the debate about why people kill themselves. In recent years, psychologists
and psychiatrists have looked at the relationship between “life events”—an
oddly bloodless phrase for catastrophe and heartbreak—and the onset of
psychiatric illnesses such as depression, mania, and schizophrenia. Although life
events may, of course, be positive (for example, getting married or getting
promoted at work), most investigators have focused on adverse events such as
medical illness, divorce or separation, death or illness in the family, family
discord, and financial or job problems.
There are many reasons to believe that stressful events might bring on or
worsen a psychiatric illness. If the underlying psychiatric illness or biological
predisposition is severe enough, such events may well play a role in suicide as
well. We know that stress has a profound effect not only on the body’s immune
system and the production of powerful stress hormones but also on the sleep-
wake cycle (which, in turn, plays a critical role in the pathophysiology of mania
and depression). Tom Wehr and his colleagues at the National Institute of Mental
Health, for instance, have demonstrated that psychological stress, certain
medications and illnesses, and significant changes in light and temperature can
interfere with circadian rhythms; these disturbances can, in turn, trigger mania or
depression in genetically vulnerable individuals.
The relationship between the events of life, stress, and psychiatric illness is
not a straightforward one, however. People, when manic or depressed, not only
are influenced by the events in their lives, they also have a strong reciprocal
influence on the world and people around them: they often alienate others with
their anger, withdrawal, or violence; act in such ways as to cause divorce; or get
themselves fired from work. What looks like the cause of a relapse may in fact
be brought about by the illness itself. (There is, for example, no consistent strong
relationship between unemployment and suicide. It is clear, however, that heavy
drinking, mental illness, and personality disorders all contribute to
unemployment.) The causal arrows move both ways, further compounded by the
fact that individuals, when depressed or psychotic, react to stress in very
different ways from those who are not mentally ill. Accordingly, many
researchers have narrowed their study of life events to the so-called independent
life events, such as a death or serious illness in a family. Unlike “events” such as
divorce or financial problems, which are more likely to be affected by mental
illness, these independent events are more genuinely random.
Most research finds a significant increase in life events prior to the onset of
both manic and schizophrenic episodes, although the influence of psychosocial

stress appears to be less important in later stages of manic-depressive illness (by
which time the illness has often established a rhythm of its own). Patients with
mood disorders seem, for the most part, to be more affected by stressful life
events then those who suffer from schizophrenia. Psychologist Sherry Johnson
and her colleagues at Brown University found that negative life events not only
increase the rate of relapse in patients with manic-depression, they also increase
the length of time it takes for patients to recover from their episodes of
depression or mania. Without significant causes of stress, patients take about
four months to recover. If, on the other hand, significant negative life events
precede the relapse, it takes, on average, almost eleven months before they are
well again. This nearly threefold increase in recovery time is not only a highly
painful time for patients and their families, it is also an extended period of
vulnerability for suicide.
Sudden heartbreak or catastrophe is often known to have occurred before a
suicide, but the nature and extent of the crisis it causes is unclear. Almost
certainly, most of the danger of the event lies in its incendiary effect on the
underlying mental condition. But the ultimate impact of psychological stress is
different in each individual, depending on his or her own life experiences, ease
of access to a means of death, extent of hopelessness, and type and severity of
the mental illness. Difficulties and conflicts in personal relationships or
imminent threats of arrest or criminal prosecution tend to occur more frequently
before the suicides of alcoholics and substance abusers, for instance, than before
the suicides of individuals with depression. (Sometimes the reasons for
desperation are beyond fathoming. One six-year-old girl who tried to throw
herself out of a moving car said simply, when brought into a psychiatric clinic, “I
am very hungry. I bite people and try to eat them up. I am a bad girl, and I
should die.”)
Gender also matters. In a large Finnish study, the partners of those who had
killed themselves were asked what they thought was the reason for suicide.
Severe mental illness was rated as the most important cause of suicide in the
women, whereas medical illness was seen as a more important reason for suicide
in the men. For both men and women, intense interpersonal discord was also
perceived as an important contributing factor.
Differences in gender exist at a younger age as well. Young or adolescent
boys, for instance, are much more likely than girls to have experienced a crisis
event in the twenty-four hours prior to suicide. Particularly common are
breakups with girlfriends, disciplinary or legal crises (such as suspension from
school or a pending appearance in juvenile court), and humiliating events, such
as public failure or rejection. David Shaffer, a child psychiatrist at Columbia

University in New York, finds that many male adolescents who kill themselves
are not only depressed but aggressive, quick-tempered, and impulsive; they also
tend to drink heavily, use drugs, and have difficulties in their relationships with
others. Most other clinicians and researchers agree. Depressive illnesses in
conjunction with substance abuse are common in these adolescents, providing a
combustible fusion when triggered by an adverse or painful event. The fact that
most parents are unaware of depression and suicidal thinking in their adolescent
children only makes the potential for disaster worse. Recent research shows that
adolescents who suffer from depression are much more likely than those with no
psychiatric illness to commit suicide when they reach adulthood.
A different but not uncommon profile of an adolescent suicide is that of a
high-achieving, anxious, or depressed perfectionist. Setbacks or failures, either
real or imagined, can sometimes precipitate suicide. It may be difficult to
determine the extent of such a child’s psychopathology and mental suffering, due
to the tendency to try to appear normal, to please others, not to call attention to
oneself. The real reasons for suicide remain fugitive.
One fifteen-year-old boy wrote this poem two years before he killed himself:
Once … he wrote a poem.
And he called it “Chops,”
Because that was the name of his dog, and that’s what it was
all about.
And the teacher gave him an “A”
And a gold star.
And his mother hung it on the kitchen door, and read it to all
his aunts …
Once … he wrote another poem.
And he called it “Question Marked Innocence,”
Because that was the name of his grief, and that’s what it
was all about.
And the professor gave him an “A”
And a strange and steady look.
And his mother never hung it on the kitchen door because he
never let her see it …

Once, at 3 a.m.… he tried another poem …
And he called it absolutely nothing, because that’s what it
was all about.
And he gave himself an “A”
And a slash on each damp wrist,
And hung it on the bathroom door because he couldn’t reach
the kitchen.
PSYCHOLOGICAL PAIN or stress alone—however great the loss or disappointment, however
profound the shame or rejection—is rarely sufficient cause for suicide. Much of
the decision to die is in the construing of events, and most minds, when healthy,
do not construe any event as devastating enough to warrant suicide. Stress and
pain are relative, highly subjective in their experiencing and evaluation. Indeed,
some people thrive on stress and are at sea without it; chaos and emotional
upheaval are a comfortable part of their psychological lives. Many individuals at
a relatively high risk for suicide—for example, those with depression or manic-
depressive illness—function extremely well between episodes of their illness,
even when in situations of great pressure, uncertainty, or repeated emotional or
financial setbacks.
Depression shatters that capacity. When the mind’s flexibility and ability to
adapt are undermined by mental illness, alcohol or drug abuse, or other
psychiatric disorders, its defenses are put in jeopardy. Much as a compromised
immune system is vulnerable to opportunistic infection, so too a diseased brain
is made assailable by the eventualities of life. The quickness and flexibility of a
well mind, a belief or hope that things will eventually sort themselves out—these
are the resources lost to a person when the brain is ill.
We know that the brain’s inability to think fluently, reason clearly, or perceive
the future with hope creates a defining constellation of depression. We also know
that depression is at the heart of most suicides. Neuropsychologists and
clinicians have found that people when depressed think more slowly, are more
easily distracted, tire more quickly in cognitive tasks, and find their memory
wanting. Depressed patients are more likely to recall negative experiences and
failure, as well as to recall words with a depressive rather than a positive context.
They are also more likely to underestimate their success on performance tasks.
Most of the impaired cognitive functioning in depression is also apparent in
highly suicidal patients, including those who have recently tried to kill
themselves. Suicidal patients, for example, are less able to generate possible
solutions when presented with a series of problems to solve. Their thinking is

more constricted and rigid, their perceived options narrow dangerously, and
death is seen as the only alternative. Occasionally death is seen not just as the
only alternative but as a highly seductive and romantic one. A nineteen-year-old
college student illustrates this in drawings she gave to her psychologist, which
portray suicide as a tranquil surcease of pain, a lulling alternative to the
problems of life.
When suicidal patients undergo psychological testing, the experiences they
describe tend to be negative, vague, and diffuse, and they see the future with
futility and despair. When asked to think of things they are looking forward to,
suicidal patients come up with far fewer than nonsuicidal people do. Often only
a sense of responsibility to other family members or concerns about the effects
of suicide on their children keep some people alive who otherwise have a strong
desire to commit suicide.
In short, when people are suicidal, their thinking is paralyzed, their options
appear spare or nonexistent, their mood is despairing, and hopelessness
permeates their entire mental domain. The future cannot be separated from the
present, and the present is painful beyond solace. “This is my last experiment,”
wrote a young chemist in his suicide note. “If there is any eternal torment worse
than mine I’ll have to be shown.”

Drawings by a nineteen-year-old college sophomore
This sense of the unmanageable, of hopelessness, of invasive negativity about
the future is, in fact, one of the most consistent warning signs of suicide. Aaron
Beck and his colleagues at the University of Pennsylvania have shown, in an
extensive series of studies, that hopelessness is strongly related to eventual
suicide in both depressed inpatients and outpatients. So, too, has Jan Fawcett of
Chicago’s Rush-Presbyterian Hospital in his long-term prediction studies of
suicide. People seem to be able to bear or tolerate depression as long as there is
the belief that things will improve. If that belief cracks or disappears, suicide
becomes the option of choice.
ON OCTOBER 29, 1995, twenty-year-old Dawn Renee Befano, a talented Maryland
freelance journalist who had suffered from severe depression for years, killed
herself. She left behind twenty-two journals, which are now in unpublished
manuscript form. Excerpts from the journal written in the weeks leading up to
her death show how unbearable her world had become, how her sense of her

options had constricted them to nonexistence, and how an agonizing, suffusing
hopelessness pervaded all reaches of her mind:
October 9th.
I will not last another month feeling as I do now. I do not question
that my eyes are brown, and I do not question my fate: I will die a
suicide within the next month if relief does not come relatively quick. I
am growing more and more tired, more and more desperate. I am
dying. I know I am dying, and I know it will be by my own hand.…
I am so bone-tired and everyone around me is tired of my illness.
October 10th.
Outside the world is crisp and blue, refreshing fall weather,
beautiful weather. I feel like hell, trapped in a black free-fall. The
contrast between the two makes both seem more extreme.
In a strange way, however, I feel at peace, resigned to my fate. If I
do not feel better by the end of November, I have decided to choose
death over madness. I know, one way or another, that this will all be
over with by the end of next month. This will all be over and done with.
…
I feel everything and all is pain. I do not want to live, but I must
stick it out until my deadline.
October 11th.
I’m terrified. What’ll it be, death or madness? In all honesty, living
like this for another two weeks is difficult to imagine. I can only take
so much of this punishment. When I die, all I leave behind are these
journals.… I don’t think I’ll leave a suicide note, these journals will be
more than adequate.
October 17th.
I can’t think. All is muddled. I want to sink into sleep, to escape. I
am so tired. To care about anything takes such a tremendous effort.
The fog keeps rolling in.
I simply want the world to leave me alone, but the world slips in
through the cracks and crannies. I cannot help that. The goddamn fog
keeps rolling in.

Insane. This waiting is truly testing my endurance. I cannot handle
it for much longer. I don’t want to have to handle it. Nobody around
me does either. Nobody.
October 20th.
Behold, I am a dry tree.—Isaiah 56:3
October 23rd.
I want to die. Today I feel even more vulnerable than usual. The
pain is all-consuming, overwhelming. Last night I wanted to drown
myself in the lake after everyone in the house had gone to sleep, but I
managed to sleep through that impulse. When I awoke, the urgency
had vanished. This morning, the urgency is back. I live in hell, day in
and day out. Every day, I break down a little bit more. I am eroding,
bit by bit, cell by cell, pearl by pearl. I am not getting any better.
“Better” is alien to me, I cannot get there. They can try acupuncture,
they can try ECT, they can try a frontal lobotomy, none of it will work.
I am a hopeless case. I have lost my angel. I have lost my mind. The
days are too long, too heavy; my bones are crushing under the weight
of these days.
October 24th.
I am sick, so sick. Impossibly sick.…
October 28th.
So this is what the Tibetan Book of the Dead calls “bardo,” the time
between lives. I don’t have any taste for life because I am between
lives. A more optimistic way of putting things, instead of simply, I don’t
want to live.…
I will not go back into a hospital. I will simply take a walk into the
water.
The pain has become excruciating, constant and endless. It exists
beyond time, beyond reality, beyond endurance. Tonight I would take
an overdose, but I don’t want to be sick, I just want to be dead.
The next morning Dawn woke early. She sat at the kitchen table, ate cold
cereal, and worked on the crossword puzzle from the newspaper. After a short
while, she left the kitchen and was not seen alive again.

The bed in her room was made neatly, according to her mother. There was “a
stack of thirteen library books on the floor, and the contents of her backpack,
including keys, cash, and her driver’s license, stowed in a large envelope. Her
great-grandmother’s crystal rosary beads were spread out on the bed.”
Her body was found months later, floating in a lake.

CHAPTER 4
The Burden of Despair
—PSYCHOPATHOLOGY AND SUICIDE—
One forgets emotions easily. If I were dealing with an imaginary
character, I might feel it necessary for verisimilitude to make him
hesitate, put the revolver back into the cupboard, return to it again after
an interval, reluctantly and fearfully, when the burden of boredom and
despair became too great. But in fact there was no hesitation at all.
—GRAHAM GREENE
“MISERABLENESS IS like a small germ I’ve had inside me as long as I can remember,”
wrote Graham Greene. “And sometimes it starts wriggling.” When the
miserableness became intolerable, Greene reached out first for a knife, then for
poison, and finally for a gun. Pathological despair came to him early and often
throughout his life, cycling—as manic-depression will—with a dangerous,
alcoholic, and suicidal ferocity. In his memoir A Sort of Life, Greene described
his early encounters with suicidal depression and his escalating attempts to numb
or die his way out of it. While still at school,
I tried out other forms of escape after I failed to cut my leg. Once at
home on the eve of term I went into the dark room by the linen-
cupboard, and in that red Mephistophelean glare drank a quantity of
hypo under the false impression it was poisonous. On another occasion
I drained my blue glass bottle of hay-fever drops, which, as they
contained a small quantity of cocaine, were probably good for my
despair. A bunch of deadly nightshade, picked and eaten on the
Common, had only a slightly narcotic effect, and once, towards the
end of one holiday, I swallowed twenty aspirins before swimming in
the empty school baths.
Were these “real” suicide attempts, desperate gestures, or simply dramatic

responses to the usual glooms of childhood? This is an inevitable question in
light of actions taken by a precocious and sensitive schoolboy: How much of
what he did was due to his temperament (and, in this case, the quick and finely
wired temperament of a child who went on to become a great writer), how much
was in response to painful or difficult circumstance, and how much was due to
his underlying mental illness, the manic-depression openly acknowledged by
Greene and an illness that also ran in his family?
Certainly, thoughts of suicide did not pass as Greene grew older. When he was
nineteen, he removed his brother’s revolver from the cupboard in their bedroom
—“I felt nothing,” he said. “I was fixed, like a negative in a chemical bath”—
and walked toward the beech woods:
I slipped a bullet into a chamber and, holding the revolver behind my
back, spun the chambers round.…
I put the muzzle of the revolver into my right ear and pulled the
trigger. There was a minute click, and looking down at the chamber I
could see that the charge had moved into the firing position. I was out
by one.…
This experience I repeated a number of times.… The revolver would
be whipped behind my back, the chamber twisted, the muzzle quickly
and surreptitiously inserted in my ear beneath the black winter trees,
the trigger pulled.
Greene did not, in the end, kill himself. But the possibility of suicide was a
recurring presence in his life and, as for many with depression, the seeming best
and final response to bale and weariness. He continued to wage war against his
black depressions, “the hopeless misery of the years,” as he put it, using alcohol,
the perverse exhilaration and risk of Russian roulette, and dangerous travels
abroad into war zones and other areas of high political and social volatility, as
antidotes to a bled-out state.
Suicide, at once the most individual of acts, is also a numbingly stereotypic
and common end point for many who suffer from severe psychiatric illness.
While no one illness or set of circumstances can predict suicide, certain
vulnerabilities, illnesses, and events make some individuals far more likely than
others to kill themselves.
The most common element in suicide is psychopathology, or mental illness; of
the disparate mental illnesses, a relative few are particularly and powerfully
bound to self-inflicted death: the mood disorders (depression and manic-

depression), schizophrenia, borderline and antisocial personality disorders,
alcoholism, and drug abuse. Study after study in Europe, the United States,
Australia, and Asia has shown the unequivocal presence of severe
psychopathology in those who die by their own hand; indeed, in all of the major
investigations to date, 90 to 95 percent of people who committed suicide had a
diagnosable psychiatric illness. High rates of psychopathology have also been
found in those who make serious suicide attempts.
Work done by Clare Harris and Brian Barraclough in England, shown here in
an adapted form, gives a general notion of which kinds of mental illness place an
individual at risk. The researchers analyzed the results of 250 clinical studies and
compared the number of suicides in people suffering from specific mental
illnesses with the number of suicides expected in the general population. To
determine suicide risks in schizophrenia, for example, they reviewed thirty-eight
studies from thirteen countries; altogether, the suicide rate in more than thirty
thousand schizophrenic patients was compared with that of the general
population. The patients with schizophrenia, as can be seen in the graph, were
more than eight times as likely to die by their own hand.
A history of a serious suicide attempt turned out to be the single most
powerful predictor of subsequent suicide, placing an individual at thirty-eight
times the expected risk. Mood disorders and substance abuse also carry with
them very high rates: those who suffer from depression, or from dependence
upon 
prescription 
drugs 
(sedatives, 
sleeping 
medications, 
antianxiety
medications), are twenty times more likely to kill themselves than the general
population, and individuals with manic-depression (bipolar disorder) are fifteen
times more likely. Although people who are dependent upon prescription
medications have a higher rate of suicide than people dependent upon alcohol,
alcohol is, because far more people use it, responsible for many more suicides.
This is in part because there are more individuals who are alcoholics than who
are prescription drug abusers; in part because depressive disorders are frequently
—and lethally—accompanied by alcohol dependence; and in part because
alcohol is often used in conjunction with other methods at the actual time of
suicide.

Suicide risk in selected psychiatric and medical conditions
What is perhaps most striking about this summary of studies, however, is how
many more suicides are linked to psychiatric illnesses than are to serious medical
disorders such as Huntington’s disease, multiple sclerosis, or cancer. It seems
strange that the latter illnesses, so often tied to pain, disfigurement, diminished
dignity and independence, and death, are as little associated with suicide as they
are. Most nonpsychiatric medical illnesses, however, are not accompanied by an
increased rate of suicide; even though physical illnesses are common in people
who commit suicide, they are also common in people who do not kill
themselves. In one study of psychiatric patients, for example, researchers found
that one-third of the patients who committed suicide suffered from

nonpsychiatric physical illness; when they looked at the prevalence of such
illnesses in psychiatric patients who did not kill themselves, however, they found
that nonpsychiatric physical illnesses were as common or more so.
Two things seem to be true: First, although there are exceptions, almost
everyone who has a physical illness and subsequently commits suicide also has a
psychiatric illness. Second, most of the medical conditions that do show a
significant increase in the rate of suicide—temporal lobe epilepsy, Huntington’s
disease, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury, HIV/AIDS, head and neck cancer
—originate in or strongly influence the brain and the rest of the nervous system.
These medical disorders can cause extreme mood swings and, in some instances,
dementia. Other illnesses, such as heart and lung diseases, may be painful,
disabling, or life-threatening, but they do not make suicide more likely (some
treatments for these illnesses, however, such as coronary bypass surgery and
certain medications used to treat high blood pressure, may cause severe, even
suicidal depression in vulnerable individuals).
The focus of this book is on suicide in the relatively young and otherwise
physically healthy, and therefore the issues surrounding suicides committed in
the context of terminal illness are not as relevant as they would be in a
discussion of suicide in the elderly. Still, it is important to underscore the fact
that even in those with medical illnesses, most suicides or severe attempts are
due to coexisting depression. The only condition that actually seems to protect
against suicide is pregnancy, a condition of youth or relative youth. During
pregnancy and the first year afterward, there is a three- to eightfold decrease in
the risk of suicide.
The illnesses most commandingly responsible for suicide are the psychiatric
disorders. And nowhere is the danger of suicide more real than in the mood
disorders: depression and manic-depression.
Mood disorders, or mood disorders in combination with alcohol and drug abuse,
are by far the most common psychiatric conditions associated with suicide. In
fact, some type of depression is almost ubiquitous in those who kill themselves.
An estimated 30 to 70 percent of people who kill themselves are victims of
mood disorders; the rate is even higher when depression coexists with alcohol or
drug abuse.
In its severe forms, depression paralyzes all of the otherwise vital forces that
make us human, leaving instead a bleak, despairing, desperate, and deadened
state. It is a barren, fatiguing, and agitated condition; one without hope or
capacity; a world that is, as A. Alvarez has put it, “airless and without exits.”

Life is bloodless, pulseless, and yet present enough to allow a suffocating horror
and pain. All bearings are lost; all things are dark and drained of feeling. The
slippage into futility is first gradual, then utter. Thought, which is as pervasively
affected by depression as mood, is morbid, confused, and stuporous. It is also
vacillating, ruminative, indecisive, and self-castigating. The body is bone-weary;
there is no will; nothing is that is not an effort, and nothing at all seems worth it.
Sleep is fragmented, elusive, or all-consuming. Like an unstable gas, an irritable
exhaustion seeps into every crevice of thought and action.
Sylvia Plath, five years before her suicide, described the seeping, constricting
side of her depression: “I have been and am battling depression,” she wrote in
her journal. “I am now flooded with despair, almost hysteria, as if I were
smothering. As if a great muscular owl were sitting on my chest, its talons
clenching and constricting my heart.” British writer Alan Garner portrayed the
cold terror of the beginnings of his manic-depressive breakdown in a different
way, but the sense of horror and suffocation is palpable:
The next thing I remember is that I was standing in the kitchen, the
sunlit kitchen, looking over a green valley with brook and trees; and
the light was going out. I could see, but as if through a dark filter. And
my solar plexus was numb.
Some contraption, a piece of mechanical junk left by one of the
children, told me to pick it up. It was cylindrical and spiky, and had a
small crank handle. I turned the handle. It was the guts of a cheap
musical box, and it tinkled its few notes over and over again, and I
could not stop. With each turn, the light dimmed and the feeling in my
solar plexus spread through my body. When it reached my head, I
began to cry with terror at the blankness of me, and the blankness of
the world.
A scene from Eisenstein’s “Alexander Nevsky” swamped my brain:
the dreadful passage in which Nevsky dupes the Teutonic Knights onto
the frozen lake, and the ice breaks, and their faceless armour takes
them under. The cloaks float on the water before being pulled down,
and the hands clutch at the ice floes, which flip over and seal in the
knights.
All that helplessness, cold and horror comprised me. I was alone in
the house, and throughout the afternoon I turned the tinkle tinkle tinkle
of the broken toy, which became the sound of the ice. My body was as
heavy as the armour and the waterlogged cloaks as I slid beneath the

ice.
When the family came home, I was lying on the kitchen settle, in a
foetal position, without moving or speaking, until I went to bed at
midnight. Sleep was unconsciousness without rest.…
I was incapable of emotion except that of being incapable of
emotion. I had no worth. I poisoned the planet.
The horror of profound depression, and the hopelessness that usually
accompanies it, are hard to imagine for those who have not experienced them.
Because the despair is private, it is resistant to clear and compelling description.
Novelist William Styron, however, in recounting his struggle with suicidal
depression, captures vividly the heavy, inescapable pain that can lead to suicide:
What I had begun to discover is that, mysteriously and in ways that are
totally remote from normal experience, the gray drizzle of horror
induced by depression takes on the quality of physical pain. But it is
not an immediately identifiable pain, like that of a broken limb. It may
be more accurate to say that despair, owing to some evil trick played
upon the sick brain by the inhabiting psyche, comes to resemble the
diabolical discomfort of being imprisoned in a fiercely overheated
room. And because no breeze stirs this caldron, because there is no
escape from this smothering confinement, it is entirely natural that the
victim begins to think ceaselessly of oblivion.
Mania provides a violent contrast to the melancholic states. “The blood,” as
Austrian composer Hugo Wolf said, “becomes changed into streams of fire”;
thoughts cascade and ideas leapfrog from topic to topic. Mood is exultant but
often laced with a savage and agitated irritability. One is, said Robert Lowell,
“tireless, madly sanguine, menaced, and menacing.” Thought is expansive,
frictionless, and astonishingly quick; talk is fast and unstoppable; and the senses
are acute, engaged, and sharply responsive to the world about them.
The fluidity of thinking in mania is matched by a seductive, often psychotic
sense of the cosmic relatedness of ideas and events. (This dazzle and rush of
euphoric mania make it hard for many patients to give it up.) Russian poet
Velimir Khlebnikov—who was highly eccentric, wildly moody, for a time
institutionalized in a mental hospital, and who was described by Mayakovsky as
the “Columbus of new poetical continents … one of our masters”—believed that
he possessed “equations for the stars, equations for voices, equations for
thoughts, equations of birth and death.” The artist of numbers, he was certain,

could draw the universe:
Working with number as his charcoal, he unites all previous human
knowledge in his art. A single one of his lines provides an immediate
lightninglike connection between a red corpuscle and Earth, a second
precipitates into helium, a third shatters upon the unbending heavens
and discovers the satellites of Jupiter. Velocity is infused with a new
speed, the speed of thought, while the boundaries that separate
different areas of knowledge will disappear before the procession of
liberated numbers cast like orders into print throughout the whole of
Planet Earth.
Here they are then, these ways of looking at the new form of
creativity, which we think is perfectly workable.
The surface of Planet Earth is 510,051,300 square kilometers; the
surface of a red corpuscle—that citizen and star of man’s Milky Way
—0.000, 128 square millimeters. These citizens of the sky and the
body have concluded a treaty, whose provision is this: the surface of
the star Earth divided by the surface of the tiny corpuscular star equals
365 times 10 to the tenth power (365 × 1010). A beautiful concordance
of two worlds, one that establishes man’s right to first place on Earth.
This is the first article of the treaty between the government of blood
cells and the government of heavenly bodies. A living walking Milky
Way and his tiny star have concluded a 365-point agreement with the
Milky Way in the sky and its great Earth Star. The dead Milky Way
and the living one have affixed their signatures to it as two equal and
legal entities.
With mania, there is a vast, restless energy and little desire or need for sleep.
Behavior is erratic, impetuous, and frequently violent; drinking, sex, and the
spending of money are excessive. When mania is severe, visual and auditory
hallucinations, as well as delusions of grandeur or persecution, may occur.
Paranoia, explosive rage, and despair not uncommonly lie beneath the expansive
manic exterior.
This weaving together of paranoia and darkness in the midst of mania is clear
in the response of one of my patients to the blank card from the Thematic
Apperception Test, a psychological test that requires a patient to make up a story
about what he sees on the card. The patient, who was twenty-five years old at the
time of testing, was hospitalized for acute mania. The story he reeled off,

without pause—again, it should be noted, in response to a blank card—is
saturated with paranoid overtones, overt psychosis, and a depression that is
mixed with hope:
It’s really clear, except for some spots. There are lots of germs, that’s
why I’m not holding it close to my face. It would look better with
some color. There is an absence of all color except there are bits of
color. I identified with the hero, afraid of germs. Color of lithium.
Shapes of butterflies. Lots of symmetry, counterparts. Candy-colored
bullshit. I feel like I’m being held involuntarily in a fog, don’t see
much blue. Don’t see any flowers. A guy sees a bunch of black guys
and weirdies, he follows the man and they find a civilization, walking
like robots until they find it. They escape, find a lot of secrets about
the trap. They have a run-in with the police, find a guy who looks like
God who is arrested for having sex with his wife, who should have
been having a test-tube baby. There is a lot of electrocardiac shock in
the fog, a lot of homosexuals and green and gray people who traveled
through fog into an insane asylum. They emerged out into the world
and found the sun for the first time in a hundred years.
Earlier in the century, a more exuberant patient described a grandiosity of
psychotic proportions, as well as the rapid chase of ideas so characteristic of
mania. But underlying the escalating thoughts and feelings were fleeting strands
of self-destructiveness:
The condition of my mind for many months is beyond all description.
My thoughts ran with lightning-like rapidity from one subject to
another. I had an exaggerated feeling of self importance. All the
problems of the universe came crowding into my mind, demanding
instant discussion and solution—mental telepathy, hypnotism, wireless
telegraphy, Christian science, women’s rights, and all the problems of
medical science, religion and politics. I even devised means of
discovering the weight of a human soul, and had an apparatus
constructed in my room for the purpose of weighing my own soul the
minute it departed from my body.…
Thoughts chased one another through my mind with lightning
rapidity. I felt like a person driving a wild horse with a weak rein, who
dares not use force, but lets him run his course, following the line of
least resistance. Mad impulses would rush through my brain, carrying

me first in one direction then in another. To destroy myself or to
escape often occurred to me, but my mind could not hold on to one
subject long enough to formulate any definite plan.
Manic-depression—characterized by episodes of mania (which can be severe or
mild) in addition to episodes of depression—is less common than depression but
nonetheless quite prevalent. One person in a hundred suffers from the more
severe form of the illness, and perhaps another two or three have the milder
variations. The average age of its onset, eighteen years, is considerably younger
than that for major depression, which is about twenty-six. Unlike depression,
which is at least twice as common in women as in men, manic-depressive illness
strikes men and women evenly. Bipolar illness is generally a more severe
disorder than depression alone, recurs more frequently, and has far more of a
genetic component. It is also more likely than depression to be accompanied by
drug or alcohol abuse (nearly two-thirds of those with manic-depression have a
serious drinking or drug problem, compared with one-fourth of those with
depression alone).
Suicide attempts are disproportionately high in both of these mood disorders.
At least one person in five with major depression will attempt suicide, and nearly
one-half of those with bipolar disorder will try to kill themselves at least once.
Individuals with mood disorders tend also to make more serious attempts than
those without depressive illnesses, and, despite often using nonviolent methods
such as drug or medication overdoses, their attempts usually show more detailed
planning and a greater intent to die.
For those with mood disorders, the risk of suicide is highest if the depression
is very severe, hospitalization has been required, or suicide has been attempted at
some point. Mild or moderate depressions, while often painful and debilitating,
do not carry with them the same high risk of suicide. Swedish researchers
psychiatrically assessed an entire rural population and then kept track of their
mental health for the next fifteen to twenty-five years. Virtually all the men who
committed suicide during the follow-up period had been diagnosed during their
initial evaluations as having depressive illness. The suicide rate for men with no
psychiatric diagnosis at all was 8.3 per 100,000, but for those with depression it
escalated to 650. The direct relationship between the severity of depression and
suicide was the most compelling finding, however. No one with mild depression
committed suicide (although characterized by the Swedish doctors as “mild,”
such depressions were still sufficiently serious to lead to a radically reduced
activity level), but the rate went up to 220 per 100,000 for those who had been
diagnosed with moderate depression and skyrocketed to 3,900 per 100,000 for

those with severe depressive illness (defined by the researchers as depression
with impaired reality testing, often of psychotic proportions). The severity of
depression—especially when coupled with physical agitation, alcohol or drug
use, and profound emotional upheavals, losses, or disappointments in life—is far
more predictive of suicide than a diagnosis of depression alone.
Suicide appears to be slightly more common in major depression than in
bipolar illness, although many people who are diagnosed with depression turn
out to have mild forms of mania as well; these so-called hypomanias generally
are not reported by the patients themselves, nor are they always picked up by
their doctors or ascertained through psychological autopsies. Individuals who
experience these mild periods of mania—usually characterized by high energy,
little sleep, and marked irritability—often have coexisting alcohol or drug
problems, have chaotic lifestyles, and do not take their medications as
prescribed. When irritability and substance abuse are a part of the prolonged
depressive phase of the illness, the volatile elements may prove to be a
particularly deadly combination.
The violent agitation of some suicidally depressed patients is impossible to
comprehend unless it is intimately observed or personally experienced. These
high-voltage, perturbed, yet morbid conditions are particularly common in
bipolar illness during mixed states. Broadly conceptualized as the simultaneous
occurrence of both depressive and manic symptoms, mixed states may exist as
an independent clinical form (as mania and depression do), or they may occur as
transitional conditions, bridging and blending one phase of the illness with
another. They are particularly common when depression escalates into mania,
mania ratchets down into depression, or depression clears into normal
functioning. In the late nineteenth century, psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin captured
the violent desperation of many of his manic-depressive patients:
The patients, therefore, often try to starve themselves, to hang
themselves, to cut their arteries; they beg that they may be burned,
buried alive, driven out into the woods and there allowed to die.… One
of my patients struck his neck so often on the edge of a chisel fixed on
the ground that all the soft parts were cut through to the vertebrae.
Behavior and moods during these periods tend to be volatile and erratic. Any
combination of symptoms is possible, but the one most virulent for suicide is the
mix of depressed mood, morbid thinking, and a “wired,” agitated level of energy.
Paranoia, extreme irascibility, fitful sleep, heavy drinking, and physical lashing
out not uncommonly go along with this particular variant of a mixed state. It is

singularly and dangerously uncomfortable. Excess energy produces a kind of
unhinging agitation, an “almost terrible energy,” as poet Anne Sexton put it:
I walk from room to room trying to think of something to do—for a
while I will do something, make cookies or clean the bathroom—make
beds—answer the telephone—but all along I have this almost terrible
energy in me and nothing seems to help.… I walk up and down the
room—back and forth—and I feel like a caged tiger.
Edgar Allan Poe, too, described a “fearful agitation,” in a letter written shortly
after his suicide attempt:
I went to bed & wept through a long, long, hideous night of despair
—When the day broke, I arose & endeavored to quiet my mind by a
rapid walk in the cold, keen air—but all would not do—the demon
tormented me still. I CANNOT live … until I subdue this fearful agitation,
which if continued, will either destroy my life or, drive me hopelessly
mad.
Mixed states, whether they occur as depressive manias or agitated
depressions, make people who experience them more likely to kill themselves.
Mania itself rarely kills—and, when it does, it is usually because a patient has
acted on a delusional belief that he or she can fly, walk on water, or attack an
armed police officer with impunity. The intention of suicide in such situations is
highly questionable.
Before the availability of modern medications, many patients died during
acute mania due to exhaustion, heart attacks, or widespread infections from
unnoticed and unattended wounds in their feet that occurred during prolonged,
often barefoot walks. Kraepelin described the frenetic behavior of his manic
patients:
The patient cannot sit or lie still for long, jumps out of bed, runs
about, hops, dances, mounts on tables and benches, takes down
pictures. He forces his way out, takes off his clothes, teases his fellow
patients, dives, splashes, spits, chirps and clicks.… [There are]
discharges of inner restlessness, shaking of the upper part of the body,
waltzing about, waving and flourishing the arms, distorting the limbs,
rubbing the head, bouncing up and down, stroking, wiping, twitching,
clapping and drumming.… [Death may be caused] by simple

exhaustion with heart failure (collapse) in long continuing, violent
excitement with disturbance of sleep and insufficient nourishment, by
injuries with subsequent blood-poisoning.
Psychosis, the presence of hallucinations or delusions, is less clearly
associated with risk for suicide in mood disorders than is the actual severity per
se of depression or mixed states. Some investigators have found an increase in
psychotically depressed patients, but this is by no means a consistent finding.
Even though severely depressed patients with auditory hallucinations may hear
voices commanding them to kill themselves, they do not appear to be more
likely to actually commit suicide. Psychotic patients do, however, tend to use
more violent and bizarre methods.
People with depression or manic-depression are particularly likely to kill
themselves, or make serious suicide attempts, early in the course of their illness,
often after their first attack of severe depression or following their release from a
psychiatric hospital. It is not obvious why this should be so, although
unfamiliarity with the experience of depression, uncertainty about personal and
professional repercussions, and concerns about whether or when it will come
back again all certainly play a role. Getting the correct treatment is a gamble
and, even with the best of doctors, it often takes a long time to take effect.
People often wait until they are most ill before seeking care and may be unable
to stay the treatment course long enough to make them feel sufficiently well to
continue living.
Disconcertingly, one of the highest-risk periods for suicide is when patients
are actually recovering from depression. The transition from hopelessness,
lethargy, and despair, on the one hand, to normal mood and existence, on the
other, is one freighted with hazard: mixed states are common during this time
and bring with them rapid mood swings, perturbations of energy, and disrupted
sleep. There may also be sharp disappointments when the jagged pattern of
recovery leads to feeling first well and then ill again. A resurgence of will and
vitality—ordinarily a sign of returning health—makes possible the acting out of
previously frozen suicidal thoughts and desires.
It can be difficult to distinguish between those genuinely getting well from
those who may on an impulse, or during a especially hopeless moment, kill
themselves. One study, for instance, compared written clinical observations
made on patients shortly before they committed suicide with clinical
observations made on patients of comparable ages and diagnoses who did not
commit suicide. Counterintuitively, those who killed themselves had been
assessed by their doctors as calmer and “in better spirits” than those who did not.

In fact, nearly one-third of hospitalized psychiatric patients “look normal” to
their doctors, family members, or friends in the minutes or hours just before
suicide.
This apparent calm before the storm may reflect different things: The suicidal
patients may be experiencing a genuine calm in the midst of recovery but then
switch precipitously into a severe depression or a mixed state. They may, on the
other hand, be calmer because, having decided to kill themselves, they are
relieved of the anxiety and pain entailed in having to continue to live. They may
also be deliberately deceiving their doctors and families in order to secure the
circumstances that will allow them to commit suicide. This latter tendency to
deceive in order to die has been recognized for centuries. Among those to make
note of this was the great eighteenth-century Philadelphia physician, educator,
and patriot Benjamin Rush, surgeon general of the Continental Army and signer
of the Declaration of Independence:
We should be careful to distinguish between a return of reason and a
certain cunning, which enables mad people to talk and behave
correctly for a short time, and thereby to deceive their attendants, so as
to obtain a premature discharge from their place of confinement. To
prevent the evils that might arise from a mistake of this kind, they
should be narrowly watched during their convalescence, nor should
they be discharged, until their recovery had been confirmed by weeks
of correct conversation and conduct. Three instances of suicide have
occurred in patients soon after they left the Pennsylvania Hospital, and
while they were receiving the congratulations of their friends upon
their recovery.
Mood disorders, although more linked to suicide than other mental illnesses,
are not the only ones to cause early self-inflicted death. Schizophrenia, a terrible
psychotic illness, often does as well.
“This is a good-bye letter,” wrote poet and composer Ivor Gurney to a friend in
June 1918. “I am afraid of slipping down and becoming a mere wreck—and I
know you would rather know me dead than mad.… May God reward you and
forgive me.” In a war hospital at the time, diagnosed with a “nervous breakdown
from deferred shell-shock,” Gurney was acutely suicidal and at the beginning of
a long, terrifying descent into paranoid schizophrenia. He threatened suicide on
several occasions and at least twice attempted it, once by taking an overdose of
sedatives given to him by his doctor, another time by gassing himself. Gurney’s
agony was scarcely bearable. Imaginary voices told him to kill himself, and he

was certain that electrical waves from the radio were bombarding him. The
delusions were persistent, as were the voices that threatened and tormented him.
His doctor described Gurney’s mental condition:
The electricity manifests itself chiefly in thought. Words are
conveyed to him. They are often threatening, [and] they have been
obscene and sexual. He has heard many kinds of voices. He sees things
when he is awake, faces etc. that he can recognize. He has also had a
twisting of the inside. He cannot keep his mind on his work.… With
regard to suicide he has had such pains in the head that he felt he
would be better dead.
There was little change for the better in Gurney’s psychiatric condition, and he
remained almost continuously in an asylum from 1922 until the time of his death
in 1937. He took his pain into his poetry. “There is a dreadful hell within me,” he
wrote in one of his asylum poems, “And nothing helps.… I am praying for
death, death, death.” In another, he proclaimed, “There is one who all day wishes
to die … has prayed for mercy of Death.”
Schizophrenia is the most severe and frightening of the psychiatric illnesses.
Like manic-depression, it is an illness that first hits when an individual is young
(in the late teens or early twenties); is genetic, although not as strikingly so as
bipolar disorder; is relatively common (approximately one person in a hundred
will get it); and is devastating to relationships, educational plans, and aspirations.
Left untreated, it usually gets worse over time. Alienation from friends and
family is the rule rather than the exception. Suicide, although less common than
in the mood disorders, is still common enough to make it a very lethal disease—
lethal and painful, for schizophrenia plays havoc with the senses, reason,
emotion, and the wherewithal to act. It is malevolent, and it will kill 10 percent
of its victims through suicide.
Hallucinations, the perception of something where nothing exists, and
delusions, false beliefs that persist in spite of incontrovertible evidence to the
contrary, are only part of the terror of schizophrenia. Often the entire visual and
emotional world is transformed into a dark, mapless horror. Auditory
hallucinations, especially hearing voices, are common. The voices threaten,
condemn, and demand. They may be located anywhere: near or far away; in the
heart or head, in the nose or abdomen; in the external world: in birds, telephones,
televisions, or the Internet. Usually the voices’ content is disturbing;
occasionally it is incomprehensible. Sometimes the voice is a solitary one; often
there is a conversation or argument between two voices; occasionally there is a

cacophonous chorus of sounds and words.
Visual hallucinations are not as common as auditory ones, but they are
similarly chameleonic. Emil Kraepelin, an astute observer of psychosis in both
mania and schizophrenia, gave examples of some of the many visual distortions
and hallucinations experienced by his schizophrenic patients: they saw, he said,
death’s heads, saints from all eternity, a tumbling clown, black birds of prey
hovering overhead, the emperor of China, snakes in their food, Martin Luther,
flames, red and white mice in a heart, two tortoises on the shoulder. They saw
and heard varied and dreadful things.
Physician and scientist Carol North, now on the medical school faculty at
Washington University in St. Louis, described the frightening hallucinations,
bizarre delusions, and contorted perceptions in her schizophrenic universe. Here
she recalls her experiences in the Quiet Room of the hospital ward:
I lay motionless on the plastic floor mat for hours, till my limbs grew
stiff from not moving. The drain in the center of the concrete floor
belched up rough voices that laughed at me and called me foul names
that reverberated back and forth between the puke-green tile walls
several times before dying away. Intermittently, ghoulish faces
appeared on the other side of the door’s window to observe me as they
might observe a reptile behind glass at the zoo. At first I thought those
faces belonged to the aides coming back to check on me; then I
thought maybe they were really the faces of the voices, finally
showing up to meet with me. Later, I wondered if maybe the faces
weren’t there at all, but just another product of my troubled mind.
I was caught in a limbo or maybe a purgatory, awaiting my place in
the Other World. Oh, how I wished something would happen to break
up the events and end my discomfort.
Magically, the three-inch-thick door swung open.
“Carol.” Dr. Falmouth’s voice. “I’d like to talk to you.”
“Talk … walk, balk, chalk, gawk, squawk,” the voices echoed,
rhyming Dr. Falmouth. That coded message meant we were now
traveling toward the sun with supervelocity. We had emerged from
special relativity into special-special-relativity. My body was electric,
buzzing: a sixty-cycle hum, serving as conductive material in a
communications network that allowed forty billion messages to zoom
back and forth between parallel universes and Other Worlds. Without
me to transfer their messages and hold them together, all of these

systems would fall into chaos. Dr. Falmouth would never be able to
hold strong against the awesome powers before us.
Dr. Falmouth raised my arm into the air.
My finger bolted themselves into a new mold, ready for firing off
ray beams into multidimensional space.
Grossly disorganized behavior and language also characterize schizophrenia;
speech may become incoherent and meaningless. The gradual disintegration of a
mind is almost incomprehensible. To observe its unwinding from within is surely
intolerable. To be frightened of the world; to be walled off from it and harangued
by voices; to see life as distorted faces and shapes and colors; to lose constancy
and trust in one’s brain: for most the pain is beyond conveying. Robert Bayley, a
patient with schizophrenia, put into words some of the awfulness of his day-to-
day struggles:
The reality for myself is almost constant pain and torment. The voices
and visions, which are so commonly experienced, intrude and so
disturb my everyday life. The voices are predominantly destructive,
either rambling in alien tongues or screaming orders to carry out
violent acts. They also persecute me by way of unwavering
commentary and ridicule to deceive, derange, and force me into a
world of crippling paranoia. Their commands are abrasive and all-
encompassing and have resulted in periods of suicidal behavior and
self-mutilation. I have run in front of speeding cars and severed
arteries while feeling this compulsion to destroy my own life. As their
tenacity gains momentum, there is often no element of choice, which
leaves me feeling both tortured and drained. I also hear distorted
sounds that modulate and contort from the very core of my brain.
There are times when these sounds can erupt from nowhere as the
voices continue to propel me into a crazed inner world.
The visions are extremely vivid, provoking fear and consternation.
For example, during periods of acute bombardment, paving stones
transform into demonic faces, shattering in front of my petrified eyes.
When I am in contact with people, they can become grotesquely
deformed, their skin peeling away to reveal decomposing inner
muscles and organs.
Contortions of reality are not the only sources of pain. A malignant apathy is

pervasive; emotions that are intense or pleasurable for others are often flat or
blunted for those with schizophrenia; intellect, memory, and the ability to
concentrate and think logically are eroded. (Not surprisingly, brain-imaging
studies reveal pronounced differences in structure and functioning between
individuals who have schizophrenia and those who do not.) These symptoms,
although they overlap with those of depression, tend to be more permanent, less
likely to remit over time. For many, mood is also affected: at least one in four
schizophrenic patients suffers from serious depression, which in turn makes
them far more likely to kill themselves.
Schizophrenic patients who commit suicide, like those with mood disorders,
are very likely to be depressed, intensely irritable, and restless. They are also
more likely to have attempted suicide at some point (30 to 40 percent of
schizophrenic patients attempt suicide at least once; as with depressed patients, a
history of a serious suicide attempt is the single best predictor of subsequent
suicide). They also tend to be in the early stages of their illness or recently
released from a psychiatric hospital. Although hallucinations and delusions are
clearly a source of distress to psychotic patients, the actual role they play in
precipitating suicide is unclear.
Several other psychiatric conditions, most significantly the anxiety disorders
and the borderline and antisocial personality disorders, also carry with them a
higher-than-expected risk of suicide. (Although the eating disorders anorexia
nervosa and bulimia nervosa result in many medical complications and even
death, the actual suicide rate is unclear. A review of more than thirty studies
found that approximately 1 percent of those with eating disorders die by
suicide.)
Anxiety disorders, on the other hand, especially when accompanied by panic
attacks or severe depression, definitely increase the chances of suicide. The
defining symptoms of these disorders—excessive anxiety and worry, disturbed
sleep, muscle tension, irritability, fatigue, and restlessness—tend to be long-
standing features of an affected individual’s life. Symptoms of depression are
common. Panic attacks are also associated with an increased rate of suicide and
suicide attempts, although there has been a spirited debate about the extent of the
increase. These attacks are discrete periods of intense fear or discomfort,
accompanied by an abrupt onset of a number of unpleasant physical and mental
symptoms such as palpitations or a pounding heart, sweating, shaking, a sense of
being smothered or shortness of breath, chest pain, and an acute fear of dying or
losing one’s mind. These symptoms often lead to emergency room visits because
the people experiencing them are frightened they are having a heart attack. If
panic attacks occur too often, they may lead to a sense of despair and

hopelessness, as well as to self-imposed social isolation in an attempt to avoid
situations that might trigger subsequent attacks. Severe anxiety, like severe
agitation, is a potent predictor of suicide.
Surprisingly, and uniquely among the major mental illnesses, obsessive-
compulsive disorder seems not to put those who suffer from it at an increased
risk for suicide. Although the persistent and intrusive thoughts and impulses and
the highly repetitive behaviors—such as hand washing until the hands are raw,
counting, repeatedly checking the door to ensure that it is locked—that are the
hallmarks of this illness are not only deeply distressing to those who have them
but also time-consuming (often taking up hours of every day) and highly
disruptive to virtually all aspects of life, most studies find that suicide is rare in
obsessive-compulsive disorder unless it is extremely severe or complicated by
depression.
A final broad category of psychiatric conditions, the so-called personality
disorders, include two that result in a disproportionate number of suicides.
Borderline personality disorder is broadly defined as a pervasive life pattern of
stormy relationships and impulsive, self-destructive behaviors; symptoms can
include unstable job history, chronic feelings of emptiness and fears of
abandonment, intense periods of anger, rapid mood swings, wrist slashing, skin
carving or burning, head banging, self-cutting, and suicidal behavior. Antisocial
personality disorder, which often starts as a conduct disorder in childhood, is
characterized by a pervasive pattern of disregard for the rights of others, a lack
of empathy, excessive aggression, pathological lying, little or no capacity for
remorse, and physical cruelty.
Although these disorders are dissimilar in many significant respects (for
example, antisocial personality disorder is three times as common in males; the
reverse is true for borderline personality disorder), there are several features they
share: both are familial disorders, that is, first-degree relatives (parents, siblings,
and children) are far more likely to have borderline or antisocial personality
disorders than would be expected by chance; both are relatively prevalent; and
both have a tendency to diminish in severity over time. Other features shared by
antisocial and borderline personality disorders probably also contribute to their
increased risk of suicide: markedly impulsive behavior; uncontrollable fits of
rage; frequent physical fights or unprovoked assaults; reckless behaviors, such as
high-risk sexual promiscuity or substance abuse; highly unstable moods, and
extreme irritability. The virulent instability of mood and behavior, coupled with
the diagnostic hallmarks of manipulativeness and a disregard for the feelings and
rights of other people, essentially guarantees combative relationships, an
impoverished and solitary personal life, and occupational chaos, unemployment,

or imprisonment.
Reckless and violent behaviors, which we will look at more closely in the next
several chapters, have been associated time and again with suicide and serious
suicide attempts in those with psychiatric illnesses. When the unstable elements
that define borderline and antisocial personality disorders mix with depression,
alcoholism, or substance abuse, the combination can be explosive, dangerous,
and not uncommonly lethal. Nearly three-quarters of those with borderline
personality disorder attempt suicide at least once, and 5 to 10 percent do kill
themselves. With these patients, suicidal behavior is more bound to their
conflicts in relationships with other people than it is with patients who have
major depression, schizophrenia, or manic-depression. Borderline patients are
exquisitely sensitive to actual or perceived rejection, and their depressed moods,
although short in duration, are far more responsive to setbacks in relationships.
(Suicide itself often takes place in the physical presence of another person. In
one study, more than 40 percent of suicides committed by borderline patients
were witnessed by other people; in individuals with other diagnoses, only about
15 percent of suicides were witnessed.)
A clinician who has worked a great deal with borderline personality disorder,
Howard Wishnie, described a thirty-two-year-old mother of three children who
had been hospitalized for depression and brief psychotic episodes:
During the first hours of hospitalization she appeared as a neatly
dressed attractive young woman who was immediately comfortable
with staff and patients. There was no objective evidence of depression.
Over the weekend she overdosed with alcohol and sedatives. On
Monday when she reappeared at the hospital, medications were
immediately discontinued. The patient made many attempts to have
her medications restored to her and refused to recognize that her
inappropriate use of medication could be sufficient grounds for the
discontinuance. By Monday afternoon she had become openly
seductive with the resident therapist and demanded sexual relations.
Her appearance and behavior had become more disorganized and
bizarre. Attempts to discuss the rapid fluctuation in the patient’s
appearance and mental status were explained as evidence of her
“illness,” for which she had no understanding. When the therapist
pointed out that the patient’s ability to manage her own life and deal
with her intense feelings seemed better prior to hospitalization, the
patient became enraged and stated that she would go to another
hospital where the doctors understood her better and would be less

distant. She stormed out of his office and left the building
After several minutes the therapist left his office. He returned ten
minutes later and found the patient standing in a pool of blood. She
had smashed the windows in his office and cut herself with the glass.
Several months later she explained: “You were supposed to be in your
office for me, even if I said I was leaving. I knew you would be there.
When you weren’t, I suddenly saw my father’s face appear on the
glass coming at me. A great tear appeared in his face. The world was
being torn apart. I began to smash out the images.”
The brief psychotic episode was followed by a second one on the
same day when a meeting was held with the patient’s husband. In spite
of the patient’s demonstrated capacity for regression, the conditions for
treatment and hospitalization in terms of the patient’s responsibility for
her own behavior were restarted. The patient began telling her husband
of the doctor’s callous indifference to her. When this failed to alter the
stated conditions for continuing treatment in the hospital, the patient
fell to the floor, began chewing on the chair leg and making bizarre
moans and cries. He pulled her off and angrily stated that her behavior
clearly demonstrated her need for intense treatment and her inability to
be responsible for herself. The therapist maintained his position, and
the patient assumed a trancelike appearance. She and her husband left
the office to seek hospitalization elsewhere.
One hour later the therapist received a phone call from the patient.
Her voice was clear and direct, as upon admission. She said, “Doctor, I
agree.” Her agreement was to continue treatment as initially stated.
She was immediately discharged and seen as an outpatient for the next
one and one-half years. Several brief psychotic episodes occurred
during subsequent therapy sessions. Each related to real or suspected
object loss. The identification of the loss in each case was followed by
the lifting of the psychosis within the treatment hour. Had this patient
been seen during one of her regressed states without the benefits of
previous history she could easily have been diagnosed as
schizophrenic.
The major clue of her actual diagnosis was the open and dramatic
discussion of symptoms coupled with the mobilization of numerous
people in the environment on her behalf.
All the psychiatric conditions we have been discussing—the mood disorders,

schizophrenia, and the anxiety and personality disorders—are not only painful
and terrible illnesses to have, they also have profound, usually alienating and
destabilizing, effects on the ability of the affected person to have meaningful
relationships, to engage in satisfying and economically viable work, and to
believe in the point of living. All these disorders are also made infinitely worse
by using alcohol or drugs.
Schizophrenia and the mood, anxiety, and personality disorders are at the heart
of many suicides, but by no means all. Alcohol and drug abuse, either in their
own right or, more commonly, in combination with depression and other mental
illnesses, take a terrible toll as well. Substance abuse, like manic-depression and
schizophrenia, usually begins early in life, often in adolescence or the early
twenties, and, once it has set in, has a stubbornly progressive course. Despite
massive and often irreversible personal, financial, social, legal, and professional
problems, people with a drinking or drug abuse problem typically continue
compulsively to use the substances that are destroying them.
It is not always easy to sort out dependence on drugs or alcohol from the
depressive illnesses that can precede, accompany, or follow the onset of
substance abuse. Both kinds of problems involve disturbances in mood, thinking,
behavior, sleep, and appetite. Alcoholism can cause most of the symptoms of
depression, and very serious depression can follow prolonged periods of
drinking. The reasons for this are both obvious and subtle. Psychiatric illnesses
such as depression, mania, and schizophrenia are painful and frightening. Drugs
and alcohol can, in the short term, bring relief from the despair and blot out, for
a while, a sense of hopelessness and ragged nerves. Drinking increases not only
during depression but most pathologically so when people are manic or
experiencing agitated mixed states. These perturbing conditions invite the use of
alcohol or other drugs, such as sedatives and hypnotics, to tamp down the
restlessness, afford the possibility of sleep, and cloak, however briefly, the
unpleasant sensations that are such a large part of these psychological and
physical conditions.
Self-medication to lessen disturbing thoughts and grisly moods tends to be
quite specific in practice. Cocaine, for example, is used by many who are
depressed not only as an antidepressant—albeit an exceedingly costly and
ultimately damaging one—but also, in those with manic proclivities, to induce
mild manias or prolong existing ones. Opium has served a lulling, numbing
function for centuries, and alcohol, although pharmacologically a depressant and
a killer of all but fractured sleep, is used by millions to erase the moment, give

the slip to depression, and induce senselessness.
The relationship between alcohol, drugs, and mental illness is a looping-back-
upon-itself, reverberating one. Drugs, at first use, work well and often enough to
have been employed for thousands of years throughout the world as a core
means for grappling with anxiety, distress, depression, and psychosis. Fermented
grains, rolled coca leaves, and the juice of poppies have been the commonest
choices to chase the blues, resurrect the deadened senses, obliterate pell-mell
thoughts, or stifle intrusive voices. But the use of such drugs has always been
risky. To the extent that they work, they do so by altering the fine tuning of the
brain and muffling its consciousness. As such, they are blunt agents that, with
prolonged use, alter or damage the brain’s delicate chemistry. In doing so, they
work huge damage in the relationships, jobs, health, and pride of those who are
dependent on or addicted to them.
Alcohol and drugs, used to contend with the pain of mental illness, more often
worsen it. Independently or together they can precipitate acute episodes of
psychosis, worsen the overall course of the underlying illness, and not only
undermine the individual’s willingness to seek out and receive good clinical care
but also sabotage the effectiveness of prescribed treatments. Substance abuse
loads the cylinder with more bullets. By acting to disinhibit behavior, drugs and
alcohol increase risk taking, violence, and impulsivity. For those who are
suicidal or potentially so, this may be lethal. So too may the savage mood swings
that often accompany substance abuse or withdrawal from drugs. With
judgement warped, personal relationships made chaotic or destroyed, and an
escalating desire for the substances that, over time, work decreasingly well, it is
perhaps not surprising that when drug and alcohol abuse combine with
psychopathology they form an intensely volatile environment for suicide.
Research tends to support the idea that in those who have both, mental illness
usually precedes the addictive disorders. Edgar Allan Poe, no stranger to
turbulent moods chased back by wine and cider, observed, “I am constitutionally
sensitive—nervous in a very unusual degree. I became insane, with long periods
of horrible sanity. During these fits of absolute unconsciousness I drank, God
knows how much or how long. As a matter of course, my enemies referred the
insanity to the drink rather than the drink to the insanity.” His description is a
telling one.
Unfortunately, mental illness and alcoholism or drug abuse often go together.
Two of every three people with manic-depression, and one of every four with
depression, have substantial alcohol or drug abuse problems; the rates for those
with schizophrenia are nearly as high. More dangerously, those who are both
mentally ill and have such a problem are at far greater risk of attempting or

committing suicide. The combination of alcohol and depression is implicated in
the majority of all suicides. Drugs and mood disorders tend to bring out the
worst in one another: alone they are dreadful, together they kill.
Poet John Berryman, in and out of hospitals for both his alcoholism and his
manic-depression, saw his drinking and mental illness pull down the pilings of
his life and erode the foundations of his marriage, friendships, and writing. Two
years before he jumped to his death from a bridge—ending his own life, as his
father and aunt had done before him—he wrote of the futility of his mental state.
Returning to his home after yet another wild bender and ill-considered sexual
entanglement, Berryman found himself confronted by his wife, an official from
the university at which he taught, and police officers who were about to take
him, in restraints, to a psychiatric hospital:
He knew he was standing in his entry-hall. Wife facing him, cold eyes,
her arm outstretched with a short glass—a little smaller than he liked
—in her hand. Two cops to his left. His main Dean and wife
somewhere right.… The girl had gone. He was looking into his wife’s
eyes and he was hearing her say: “This is the last drink you will ever
take.” Even as somewhere up in his feathery mind he said “Screw
that,” somewhere he also had an unnerving and apocalyptic feeling
that this might be true.

CHAPTER 5
What Matters It, If Rope or Garter
—METHODS AND PLACES—
Since we can die but once, what matters it,
If rope or garter, poison, pistol, sword,
Slow-wasting sickness, or the sudden burst
Of valve arterial in the noble parts,
Curtail the miseries of human life?
Though varied is the cause, the effect’s the same:
All to one common dissolution tends.
—THOMAS CHATTERTON
THE PARTICULARS of suicide hook our imagination in a dark way. Intrigued by even the
banal ways of self-inflicted death and riveted by the bizarre, we try to reason
backward from the choice of method and place to the anguish and weariness
leading up to them. We assign meaning to the logistics of the act—a hanging in
the woods, a slashed throat in the bathroom—in the hope of entering an
inaccessible state of mind. Yet only a few methods—gunshot, jumping, poisons,
gas, hanging, drowning—account for nearly all suicides.
Seneca, in the first century, spoke of the ways: “In whatever direction you
may turn your eyes,” he wrote, “there lies the means to end your woes. See you
that precipice? Down that is the way to liberty. See you that sea, that river, that
well? There sits liberty—at the bottom. See you that tree, stunted, blighted, and
barren? Yet from its branches hangs liberty. See you that throat of yours, your
gullet, your heart? … Do you ask what is the highway to liberty? Any vein in
your body!”
Yet, as Yale surgeon and author Sherwin Nuland points out, when it actually
came time to kill himself Seneca found it more difficult than he had imagined or
had advised others: “He plunged a dagger into the arteries of his arm,” writes
Nuland, and “when the blood did not come fast enough to suit him, he cut the
veins of his legs and knees. That not sufficing, poison was swallowed, also in

vain.” Death came finally with steam suffocation in a bath.
The sheer horror of the act of suicide tends to elicit anxiety and fear in those
who have little personal familiarity with the bleak hopelessness underlying it.
For those with familiarity, however, a grim wit can sum up the options. Dorothy
Parker’s “Résumé” is one of the more mordant and famous contributions to the
subject:
Razors pain you;
Rivers are damp;
Acids stain you;
And drugs cause cramp.
Guns aren’t lawful;
Nooses give;
Gas smells awful;
You might as well live.
Parker lived what she wrote. Her first suicide attempt was with a razor to her
veins, the second with an overdose of veronal, the third with barbiturates. Her
depressions, not helped by her prodigious drinking, were frequent and awful, but
she was able to use her deadly wit to deflect the pain, at least with her friends.
Biographer Marion Meade captures Parker’s arch black humor poignantly:
When Dorothy was sufficiently recovered to receive visitors, she
prepared her performance. Even though she looked wan and still felt
weak from crying, she greeted her Round Table friends with a cheerful
grin and her customary barrage of four-letter words. Pale-blue ribbons
were gaily tied around her bandaged wrists, and she waved her arms
for emphasis as if she were proudly sporting a pair of diamond
bracelets from Cartier’s. Had she been candid about her despair, they
might have been forced to acknowledge the depth of her suffering and
probably would have responded in a manner more suitable to the
occasion. Playing it for laughs, she gave them an easy out.
Edna St. Vincent Millay was born within a year of Parker, though lifestyles
away; she too spent time in mental hospitals and wrote her share of gallows
verse on suicide. Her “I Know a Hundred Ways to Die” was, rather strangely,
published in a collection of poems for young people.
I know a hundred ways to die.

I’ve often thought I’d try one:
Lie down beneath a motor truck
Some day when standing by one.
Or throw myself from off a bridge—
Except such things must be
So hard upon the scavengers
And men that clean the sea.
I know some poison I could drink.
I’ve often thought I’d taste it.
But mother bought it for the sink,
And drinking it would waste it.
Millay and Parker dashed off in rhyme the familiar ways of suicide, but
emergency room doctors, police officers, undertakers, psychiatrists, and medical
examiners keep a morbid trove of far more dreadful means of dying. In his 1840
book The Anatomy of Suicide, physician Forbes Winslow described a man who
stabbed himself to death with his spectacles, another who threw himself to the
bears in the Jardin du Roi in Paris, and yet another who suspended himself from
the clapper of a village church bell. One Frenchman, who had been betrayed by
his mistress, called his servant and informed him that he was going to kill
himself. He asked him to make a candle of his fat, once he had died, and “carry
it lighted to his mistress.” In his final letter to her he wrote, “As he had long
burnt for her, she might now see that his flames were real; for the candle by
which she would read the note was composed of part of his miserable body.” He
then committed suicide.
Later in the century, the superintendent of the New York State Lunatic
Asylum described patients who had committed suicide by drinking boiling
water, pushing broom handles down their throats, thrusting darning needles into
their abdomens, or gulping down leather and iron.
To kill themselves, the suicidal have jumped into volcanoes; starved
themselves to death; thrust rumps of turkeys down their throats; swallowed
dynamite, hot coals, underwear, or bed clothing; strangled themselves with their
own hair; used electric drills to bore holes into their brains; walked off into the
snow with no provisions and little clothing; placed their necks in vices; arranged
for their own decapitation; and injected into themselves every substance known
to man, including air, peanut butter, poison, mercury, and mayonnaise. They
have flown bombers into mountains, applied black widow spiders to their skin,

drowned in vats of beer or vinegar, and suffocated themselves in their
refrigerators or hope chests. One of Karl Menninger’s patients tried repeatedly to
kill himself by drinking raw hydrochloric acid; he survived those attempts and
died only after swallowing lighted firecrackers.
Henry Romilly Fedden, writing about suicide earlier in this century, described
a Polish woman who swallowed “four spoons, three knives, nineteen coins,
twenty nails, seven window-bolts, a brass cross, one hundred and one pins, a
stone, three pieces of glass and two beads from her rosary.” Another woman, a
Parisian, applied a hundred leeches to her body.
More recently, there have been several reports of suicidal men deliberately
trying to infect themselves with the AIDS virus, and a disconcerting number of
people who provoke police officers into killing them, a practice known to the
police as “suicide by cop.” This baffling endgame, as it has been described by
the New York Times, is now responsible for nearly 10 percent of fatal police
shootings in the United States.
Like the police, undertakers and medical examiners are often first or early
witness to nightmarish death scenes. These scenes are terrible to consider when
drugs or drowning are involved but mentally unshakable if a particularly bizarre
or violent method has been used. In his book The Undertaking, poet and
undertaker Thomas Lynch makes this explicit in a harrowing account of one
suicide he tended:
The cuckolded householder had sat up drinking after his wife had gone
to bed announcing her intention to put spongy rollers in her hair. This
had become an intimate code which meant to him she did not want to
have sex with him but wanted to look good for the boss tomorrow.
He’d finished the bottle of Dunphy’s Irish and raided her stash of
Valium, then gone to the drawer where the Black & Decker electric
carving knife was kept between Easters and Thanksgivings and
Christmases. He’d plugged it into the wall socket on his side of the
bed, locked his jaw against any utterance and, lying down beside her,
applied the humming knife to his throat, severing his two ascending
carotid arteries and jugular veins and making it half through his
esophagus before he released his hold on the knife’s trigger. It had not
been his coming to bed, nor the buzz of the knife, nor any sound he’d
made, if, indeed, he’d made any that woke her. Rather, it was the
warmth of his blood, that gushed from his severed blood vessels
halfway up the master bedroom wall and soaked her and her spongy
rollers and saturated the bed linen and mattress and box springs and

puddled in the carpet beneath the bed that woke her wondering was it
just a dream.
These singular methods of suicide are far from being just a sideshow of
freakish death; they give testament instead to the desperation and determination
of the suicidal mind. Their very bizarreness somehow makes the act more real.
They evoke horror, certainly, but they also give us a glimpse into otherwise
unimaginable misery and madness.
The logistics of suicide in antiquity were not dissimilar to those used in the
centuries since. Weapons—knives, swords (the “Roman death”), razors, scalpels,
and daggers—were the most common means, then hanging, jumping, and
poisoning by hemlock, opium, or other drugs. Less often, but not rarely, the
Romans starved to death by refusing to eat, set themselves on fire, or provoked
murder in others who were in a position to kill them (not unlike the modern
“suicide by cop”). Anton van Hooff, who more than anyone has described the
suicide practices of classical antiquity, notes that in Rome, as now in most
countries, far more men than women killed themselves. Only in the ancient
myths did more women commit suicide.
Hanging, though a frequent method of suicide for young people and women,
was regarded by the Romans as “unclean” and shameful; weapons were thought
to be the honorable way to die. Euripides, as quoted by van Hooff, makes this
clear:
To die were best. How then with honour die?
Unseemly is the noose ’twixt earth and heaven:
Even of thralls ’tis held a death of shame,
Noble the dagger is and honourable,
And one short instant rids the flesh of life.
Over the succeeding centuries, weapons continued to be a prominent method
of suicide. Firearms, as they became more available, gradually overtook knives
and swords as the weapons of preference. Hanging, however, remained popular,
and poisons and drowning were used by an increasingly large number of people.
By the late nineteenth century in Europe, hanging and poisons were by far the
most common ways to kill oneself in France, England, and Prussia; drowning
was next in preference. Cultural differences, however, were significant.
Firearms, for example, were quite commonly used in suicides in Italy, France,

and Prussia but far less often in England, where a wide assortment of drugs and
poisons—prussic acid, caustic acid, mercury, opium, laudanum, potassium
cyanide, arsenic, vermin killers, chloroform, strychnine, and belladonna—was
put to use. After firearms, poisoning was the most common means of suicide in
the United States during the same time period.
The rivers and sea, and even the waters in city parks (such as the Serpentine in
London’s Hyde Park, where many, including Percy Bysshe Shelley’s first wife,
drowned themselves) were frequent sites of suicide; they also became a darkly
romanticized part of literature and folklore.
Langston Hughes, in this century, described the river’s lure in his succinct
poem “Suicide’s Note”:
The calm,
Cool face of the river
Asked me for a kiss.
National preferences for modes of suicide tend to vary. “Thus,” wrote sociologist
Emile Durkheim in 1897, “each people has its favorite sort of death and the
order of its preferences changes very rarely.” Nineteenth-century Russians took
to hanging, the English and Irish to poison, the Italians to firearms, the
Americans to firearms, poisons, and illuminating gas. Proclivities for certain
methods tended to go with immigrants wherever they went, or at least until they
assimilated into their new countries. “Even away from their own country,” wrote
Morselli, “the English and Irish preserve their predilection for poison and the
pistol, whilst the German always retains his pre-eminence in hanging.” Over
time, however, German immigrants to the United States tended more toward
poisoning and guns, taking on the preferred means of suicide in North America;
likewise, the English, Scottish, and Irish immigrants to Australia gradually
assumed the suicide preferences of their adopted country.
Within the same country, suicide methods often vary by geographical region.
In Belgium, for example, poisons are used more in the southern districts, while
guns are used in the wooded regions, which have a stronger cultural history of
hunting. Brussels, with its taller buildings, is more frequently the site of deaths
by jumping. Poisoning and hanging are the most popular means of suicide in
much of India, except for Punjab, where 55 percent of suicides are by lying
down on railway tracks or jumping in front of trains.
Not surprisingly, methods of suicide change over time. During the years 1960
to 1980, for example, a study of suicide methods in sixteen countries found that
deaths from domestic gas had decreased, while deaths from motor vehicle

exhaust, hanging, and firearms had increased. There were no changes in the use
of poisons, cutting, or drowning. The decrease in suicides from domestic gas
was due to a change in government policy that lowered carbon monoxide levels
in gas, thereby undercutting its deadliness. This raises critical questions about
the impact of decreasing the availability of a particular suicide method—such as
gas, prescription drugs, or firearms—on the overall suicide rate. Is there a
genuine reduction in suicides, or do suicidal individuals simply substitute
another method? This issue will be discussed later in the context of suicide
prevention policies.
In the United States, firearms are now responsible for more than 60 percent of
all suicides; no other method comes close. Strangulation (hanging, strangulation,
and suffocation) and overdoses (drugs, medications, and poisons) together
account for another 25 percent or so. Inhalation of gases and vapors, falls,
cutting, and drowning make up the remainder of self-inflicted deaths.
What, for the suicidal, determines the method of death? Is it pragmatic?
Symbolic? Or imitative? Is the method chosen for its availability, its
painlessness, or is it meant, as well, as a final reflection of style or desperation?
In his suicide note, Japanese writer Ryuunosuke Akutagawa laid out some of his
reasoning for why he chose to die as he did:
The first thing I considered is how to die without suffering. For this
purpose, probably hanging is the best, but when I picture a person
hanged to death, I feel an aesthetic abhorrence.… Drowning is not
good either, because … drowning will involve more suffering than
hanging does. Suicide by running into a rushing train also is
aesthetically abhorrent to me. Suicide by gun or knife does not seem to
work well for me because my hands shake. Jumping from a high
building produces an ugly sight. Considering thus, I have decided to
die with pills. To do so implies longer suffering than hanging but it has
advantages. My body would appear better and there would be less risk
of failure than with other methods. Its only disadvantage is the
difficulty of obtaining pills. Since I have determined to use pills, I
have tried to acquire them at every opportunity. At the same time, I
have attempted to increase my knowledge of drugs.
Then I considered the place of my suicide. My family members
must depend on what I leave for them. My possessions are a piece of
land of 100 tsubo [about 100 feet square], my home, the royalties from

my books, and savings of 2,000 yen. If I commit suicide in my house
its value will drop. I want to commit suicide in such a way that my
body will be seen as little as possible by others—other than my family
members.
Although symbolic meanings and vivid interpretations have been given to
different methods of suicide—Karl Menninger took drowning to represent a
desire to return to the womb, and Freud conjectured that the various means of
suicide represented sexual wish fulfillments (to poison oneself was to desire to
become pregnant, to drown was to wish to bear a child, and to throw oneself
from a height was to be delivered of a child; Freud did not specify whether these
interpretations were equally applicable to both sexes)—the inventiveness of the
interpretations would appear to outweigh the available evidence. Personality
traits, as measured by standard psychological tests and administered to
individuals in the months or years preceding their suicides, do not correlate with
the type of suicide method chosen. Nor have any differences in intelligence level
been found between those who choose to die by gunshot, poison, jumping,
hanging, or drowning.
Many factors undoubtedly play an important role in the choice of methods.
The availability of the method is obviously critical. In countries in which
firearms are readily available, such as the United States, or in professions that
have easy access to guns, such as the police and the military, firearms are used
disproportionately. Where toxic plants and fruits grow abundantly—for example,
poisonous alary seeds from the yellow oleander in Sri Lanka, or the fatal
sachasandia fruit in Argentina—or where deadly germicides, pesticides, and
other agrochemicals are used freely, as they are in China, Singapore, Western
Samoa, Sri Lanka, Guyana, India, and many other countries, suicide deaths
reflect their ease of access.
Where rail and metro systems flourish and other methods are less at hand;
where seas and rivers, cliffs, or tall buildings are easy to find and take advantage
of, these ways will be used by those wishing to die. If you are a doctor or a
chemist and can lay hands upon a lethal drug, you will choose it more often than
those who do not have access to or information about it. And if you are a patient
on a psychiatric ward, the right of access to the more obviously lethal means
removed, necessity will provoke the use of shoelaces, coat hangers, bedsheets, or
a rushed jump from an unprotected stairwell. If you are a psychiatric patient
outside the hospital and you have been prescribed potentially lethal medications
(such as antidepressants, lithium, or barbiturates), you may opt to poison
yourself with the drugs you have been given to treat your illness.

The availability of a method is far from the only significant consideration in
its choice. The perception of an act’s deadliness is clearly crucial to decision
making. Some methods of suicide, such as jumping, hanging, or gunshot, leave
little or no chance for detection or rescue by others. Nor do they allow the
opportunity to change one’s mind. Other methods, however, such as drug
overdoses or cutting, offer a more extended period of time between the suicidal
act and death. Discovery of the attempt, or seeking help oneself, are more than
viable possibilities; this is especially true now that highly sophisticated
emergency medical services are available at large urban trauma centers and at
many local hospitals.
One person’s estimation of a method’s effectiveness is not another’s, however.
Forensic pathologists, for example, when asked to rate twenty-eight methods of
suicide in terms of their deadliness, ranked gunshot wounds, cyanide, explosives,
being hit by a train, or jumping from a height as the most effective. The ratings
made by the pathologists were highly consistent with one another. Laypeople, on
the other hand, were wildly variable in their understanding of different methods.
They overestimated (when compared with the pathologists) the effects of
prescription drug overdoses and wrist cutting and underestimated the deadliness
of gunshot. Women tended to overestimate the lethal consequences of most
methods, especially medication overdoses, which suggests that many more
women who survive overdoses may have intended death than is commonly
thought. There is further evidence that people err in their estimates of the
deadliness of suicide methods. American adolescents, who have easy access to
over-the-counter medications and who use them in up to one-half of their drug
overdoses, tend to greatly underestimate their potential for toxicity.
In general, women use less violent and final means, although increasingly in
recent years they have turned to firearms. One study conducted in the 1970s
found that both women and men regard drugs and poisons as the “most
acceptable” form of suicide, but men perceive firearms as more “masculine,”
efficient, and easy to use. Women’s preference for drugs and poisons centers on
their perceived painlessness, accessibility, and ease of use. Fear of disfigurement
has been suggested as another possible reason to explain women’s preference for
nonviolent forms of suicide, although the evidence for this is slight.
Age also plays a role in the choice of suicide method. Now, as in antiquity,
hanging tends to be used more often by younger people. So, too, does jumping
from heights or leaping in front of oncoming trains. Firearms are used by both
the young and the old, but increasingly by the young. The type and degree of
psychopathology are also factors in the method chosen. Severely mentally ill
patients are more likely than others to immolate themselves, leap in front of

trains, or choose particularly bizarre and self-mutilative ways to die.
Some individuals avoid a particular suicide method because of concern about
risking the lives or psychological well-being of others: they will not use carbon
monoxide poisoning, for example, because gas may seep into places where other
people live; cyanide, because traces of it on the lips may endanger would-be
rescuers who use mouth-to-mouth resuscitation techniques; jumping, for fear of
landing on other people; and gunshot or jumping, because of the traumatic visual
effects on survivors. However, most who kill themselves, for reasons of pain or
impulse or crippled thought, are not able to act on any such altruistic concerns
they may have. As a result, that which may appear as anger or malevolence to
those left behind—a disfigured body left in a familiar or intimate place—may
reflect only a desperate or precipitate act. Revenge and anger play a role in the
circumstances of some suicides, but probably not most. It is next to impossible,
as Morselli wrote more than a hundred years ago, to discover the reasons,
“sometimes noble and weighty, sometimes shameful and thoughtless, why the
suicide goes to cut his throat on his own bed, or to suffocate himself in the
darkest recess of the house.”
Symbolism and suggestion also play their part in the circumstances of self-
inflicted death. Louis Dublin, former chief statistician for the Metropolitan Life
Insurance Company and, as such, keenly interested in the prediction and
prevention of suicide, wrote of the individual’s “psychological constellation and
personal symbolism.” These conditions of thought, memory, and desire,
persuaded by impulse and irrationality, are influenced as well by personal
aesthetics and private meanings. They are directed, too, by the accounts of the
suicides of others, accounts that are often enhanced or romanticized by
newspaper and television reporting or portrayals in books or films. Some
methods and places become “suicide magnets,” drawing to them not only the
impulsive and the acutely disturbed but the more chronically suicidal as well.
Leaping into a river or the sea seems always to have had both an aesthetic and
practical draw. Eons ago, the Greeks—including, it is said, Sappho and Phobos
—leapt to their deaths from the high cliffs of Leucas; others jumped from
bridges and riverbanks into the Tiber or Euphrates. More recently, the Thames
held a pragmatic allure, and by 1840 nearly 15 percent of suicides in London
were individuals who had thrown themselves off Waterloo Bridge. Wading into
the sea was an “easeful death” made strangely alluring by the Romantics.
Drowning became such a popular way to commit suicide in nineteenth-century
Paris that in order to avoid public health problems, the city paid fishermen a
bounty for every body they retrieved.
At Beachy Head, the cliffs on the eastern end of the South Downs of the

English coast, suicides have been reported since the sixth century. Recent years
have witnessed sharp peaks in the number of self-inflicted deaths here,
suggestively related to intensive media coverage. More than 120 people threw
themselves off the Sussex cliffs between 1965 and 1979. British researchers
believe that the publicity given to the suicides at Beachy Head increased the
likelihood that others would occur there. They cite, as an example of the effects
of publicity, a fifty-six-year-old man who, while in a hospital recovering from a
suicide attempt by overdose, read a newspaper report about the spate of suicides
at Beachy Head. He remarked, “Fancy putting something like that in the paper
for people like me to see.” Two weeks later he made his way to Beachy Head
and jumped to his death. (Jumping from public monuments has also had a
contagious allure—the Eiffel Tower in Paris, St. Peter’s Basilica in Rome, the
Duomo of Milan, the Campanile of Giotto in Florence, the Empire State
Building in New York City—an allure that resulted in the construction of
protective barriers on many such buildings.)
Publicity given to particular ways and places of suicide can certainly have a
bearing on the methods chosen by vulnerable individuals. Alary seeds, from the
yellow oleander plant, were unknown as a means of suicide in Sri Lanka before
1983. Newspaper coverage and a south Indian film broadcasting their use,
coupled with easy public access to the plants, increased by orders of magnitude
the number of poisonings in subsequent years. Similarly, press coverage of the
terrible deadliness of the herbicide paraquat, noting that it took only a single
mouthful to kill, greatly increased its use as a means of suicide in Fiji. An Indian
film gave parallel prominence to a waterfall at Hogenakal in south India, as did
television and newspaper publicity to suicides from high-rise apartment
buildings at Takashimadaira, near Tokyo, and fatal jumps from multistory car
parks in Australia.
In the year following the 1991 publication of Final Exit, Derek Humphry’s
best-selling book, which presented in detail a variety of ways to commit suicide
(including, prominently, suffocation by plastic bag), suicidal asphyxiations
involving plastic bags increased by 31 percent. Peter Marzuk and his colleagues
at Cornell University Medical College in New York noted that although the total
number of suicides did not increase, the publicity surrounding this particularly
lethal method may have had a deadly impact on impulsive and ambivalent
individuals. They suggest, with good cause, that clinicians include in their
assessments of suicide risk questions not only about actions of potential concern,
such as writing suicide notes or drawing up wills, but whether patients have
obtained and read literature about euthanasia or assisted suicide.
An epidemic of suicides by burning occurred in England and Wales in 1978 to

1979 after a twenty-four-year-old Australian heiress, deported from England the
week before after having threatened to kill herself in Parliament Square, set fire
to herself in front of the Palais des Nations in Geneva. Three days later, a
director of Fortnum and Mason committed suicide in a similar manner on the
banks of the Thames at Windsor. By month’s end, there had been ten
immolations, and within a year eighty-two people had killed themselves by
burning. This was in stark contrast to an annual average of twenty-three such
suicides in the years 1963 to 1978 (in no year had there been more than thirty-
five). The tremendous media coverage of the self-immolations led the
researchers who wrote up these findings to conclude that there was a need for
some form of voluntary restraint on the part of the press. “In a free society,” they
wrote, “there is a conflict between the need for a free press and the use of the
press of reports of horrifying deaths as spectacles for entertainment purposes.”
They also stressed the need to deromanticize death by burning. Far from being
quick and painless, they pointed out, only one-third of those who set fire to
themselves died immediately. Another one-third lived longer than twenty-four
hours, and all the victims experienced great pain and suffering.
AT THE FOOT of Mount Fuji, Japan’s highest mountain and a sacred site, there is a
dense forest called Jukai, the “sea of trees.” The forest, which grew over a lava
plateau, is unpopulated and essentially without roads. The first recorded suicide
in Jukai was in the fourteenth century; since that time, the thick “black forest”
has enticed hundreds to their deaths. Yoshitomo Takahaski, of Yamanashi
Medical College, contends that there is an almost mythic belief that once in the
forest there is no coming out: the magnetic composition of the igneous lava
plateau renders a compass virtually useless, and because visibility is nil, it is
next to impossible to navigate by sun or stars.
In the early 1960s, a popular Japanese writer wrote a bestselling novel that
described the heroine’s attempt to kill herself by entering the forest. Streams of
people followed her example. Television, films, newspapers, and magazines
added to the attraction by calling further attention to Jukai as a suicide site.
Regular police patrols had to be put in place in order to rescue potential suicides,
and wide-scale searches for bodies are now conducted in the spring and fall. At
least thirty still die in the forest each year, most by hanging or overdoses; a few
kill themselves with carbon monoxide poisoning or die from exposure.
Of all the suicide sites romanticized in literature, however, of all of those
given ink and airtime by the media, two stand out for their hold on both the
popular and suicidal imaginations: Mount Mihara, on the Japanese island of

Oshima, and the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco.
Mount Mihara, an active volcano in Japan, was almost entirely unknown until
January 1933, when two classmates from an upper-crust Tokyo school climbed
to the top of its crater. Meiko Ukei, at twenty-four the older of the two,
announced to her friend that she intended to throw herself into the volcano. She
would, she explained, be cremated instantly and sent heavenward in smoke and
beauty. After extracting a vow of secrecy from her friend, she jumped.
Masako Tomita was only twenty-one, and understandably unable to keep the
promise she had made. She confided in another friend, who then insisted that
Masako take her to Mount Mihara so that she, too, could “follow Meiko to
paradise through Mihara’s gateway.” Masako was unable to persuade her friend
otherwise, and in early February the two young women climbed to the top of the
volcano. The friend jumped alone, Masako returned alone, and soon the story
was a major force in the cultural life of Japan. People swarmed to Mihara, first
by steamer and then by a larger boat that was required to handle the curious. On
an April Sunday not long after the deaths of the two young women, six people
leaped into the volcano; twenty-five others had to be physically restrained from
doing so. Tourists lined up to watch the suicides, which were now occurring
several times a week. By year’s end, at least 140 people had committed suicide.
The following year, 1934, more than 160 plunged to their deaths and another
1,200 had to be restrained by the police from following suit. In January 1935,
three young men jumped to their deaths within ten minutes of one another. The
police maintained a twenty-four-hour watch at the crater, and a high barbed-wire
fence was erected; yet in 1936, at least 600 people killed themselves in Mihara.
The crater and its surrounding area and local commerce took on a ghoulish,
surreal quality, as Edward Ellis and George Allen recount in Traitor Within:
The suicide epidemic brought to Oshima a boom comparable to the
Florida land craze of 1925–26. From a barren, desolate place, it
blossomed into a combination national shrine, Coney Island, Atlantic
City, and Niagara Falls. The island’s population increased greatly.
Fourteen hotels and 20 restaurants opened within two years. Horses
were imported to carry tourists to Mihara’s summit. Five taxicab
companies opened for business. By 1935 the island’s photographers
had increased from two to 47. A post office was opened at the crater’s
edge. A strictly amusement-park touch was added with the
construction of a 1,200-foot chute-the-chute down Mihara’s slope to
provide the visitors a final thrill.…
The Tokyo Bay Steamship Company replaced the Kiku Maru with

two new large ships, declared a 6 percent dividend on stock which had
paid no dividends for the previous three and a half years, and reported
that its net profit was now running to $280,000 a year. Part of this
income was provided by a spectacular addition which the steamship
company made to Mihara’s attractions. The company had imported
three camels to carry tourists across the mile-wide strip of volcanic
desert which surrounds Mihara’s crater. The first of these animals most
Japanese had ever seen, they were an instant, money-making success.
In an effort to escape the onus of profiting on suicide, the steamship
company refused to sell one-way tickets to Oshima. The government
backed the company with a law making it a criminal offense to attempt
to purchase a one-way passage. Plain-clothes men were assigned to
mingle with the passengers on the ships, with instructions to arrest
anyone who appeared to them to be bent on suicide.
Access to the mountain was eventually closed, but not before at least a thousand
people had thrown themselves into the crater.
A year or so later, on the other side of the Pacific Ocean, the Golden Gate
Bridge was opened. A graceful structure in San Francisco Bay in a staggeringly
beautiful part of the world, it soon took on the siren call of Mount Mihara. Three
months after the bridge opened in May 1937, the first of more than a thousand,
and some estimate nearly twice that number, committed suicide by jumping over
the side. Leaping to death from the Golden Gate Bridge soon entered into
American folklore, much as Mihara had seeped into Japanese cultural awareness.
Psychologists Richard Seiden and Mary Spence, of the University of California
at Berkeley, observe that a language and mythology soon grew up around the
bridge: if the stress gets too great, they quote city residents as saying, “one can
always go off the bridge.” In San Francisco, Gray Line Tour bus drivers cited
Golden Gate Bridge suicides as a part of their tours, and jokes on the subject
ended up in greeting cards. The San Francisco Chronicle reported a lottery
whose players bet on the date of the next suicide from the bridge.
The jump from the Golden Gate Bridge is 250 feet and almost invariably fatal.
Trauma from water impact is extreme, ripping apart the great blood vessels,
demolishing the central nervous system, and transecting the spinal cord. A few
have died from drowning and one from a shark attack, but mostly death is
caused by the crushing impact of body on water. In the word of one of the
doctors who investigated the causes of death in the suicide victims, the trauma
rips the internal organs “asunder.”
In fact, only 1 percent of those who jump from the Golden Gate Bridge

survive. David Rosen, a psychiatrist at the University of California, San
Francisco Medical School, interviewed six of those survivors, and all said that
for them it was only the Golden Gate Bridge that they considered as a suicide
site; as one put it, “It was the Golden Gate Bridge or nothing.” Another
remarked, “There is a kind of form to it, a certain grace and beauty. The Golden
Gate Bridge is readily available and it is connected with suicide.” One man,
suffering from depression, also emphasized the bridge’s accessibility. In the
suicide note he left before jumping off the bridge, he asked, “Why do you make
it so easy?”
All the survivors favored the construction of a suicide barrier, an idea resisted
by bridge officials until very recently. Most of the survivors also stressed the
importance of somehow deromanticizing suicide from the bridge. One survivor,
understandably, if naively, said, “Newspaper editors should voluntarily stop all
press coverage of the Golden Gate Bridge suicides—extensive press coverage
put the idea into my mind.” This is debatable, but it is an important and
complicated debate to which we will return.
Far more people actually kill themselves in psychiatric hospitals than they do
in highly publicized or exotic places. Five to 10 percent of all suicides, in fact,
take place in mental hospitals. It may seem strange that such high rates should
exist in places specifically designed to protect patients from harming or killing
themselves. But in many ways, it is no more strange than the fact that there are
high death rates in intensive care units or on oncology wards. Psychiatric
hospitals exist to take care of the most severely ill and those most at risk for
suicide. A common reason for admission to a mental hospital is having
attempted suicide, and attempted suicide is, as we have seen, the single best
predictor of subsequent suicide. A substantial risk of suicide is also one of the
few reasons people can be held in hospitals involuntarily.
Although many precautions can be taken by medical staff to protect patients,
there is no way, short of intolerable violations of privacy and freedom, to protect
everyone. The line between civil liberties and preservation of life is a
controversial one. Acutely suicidal patients are kept under close observation,
often on a locked ward. Windows on such wards are usually unbreakable and
unopenable, electrical cords are kept as short as possible, and “breakaway”
hooks and shower rods, designed to break off at low weights, are used. Patients
are searched for sharp objects and drugs, and matches, lighters, nail polish
remover, mirrors, bottles, scissors, belts, and shoelaces are removed from their
possession.
Physical observation of suicidal patients is intense, with levels varying
according to the assessment of the suicide risk. In one-to-one observation, the

patient is continuously watched and accompanied by a staff member even when
the patient is showering or using the toilet. The physical proximity is kept close,
sometimes no further than arm’s length, in order to allow a quick response in
case of a sudden or impulsive move. Occasionally, a single nurse may observe
two or three suicidal patients at the same time; if the suicide risk appears to
lessen, a patient will then be put on five-, fifteen-, or thirty-minute “checks.”
These checks consist of staff members monitoring the whereabouts and well-
being of the patient on a frequent but not continuous basis.
Were suicidal patients able or willing to articulate the severity of their suicidal
thoughts and plans, little risk would exist. But this is not the case. Patients
determined to die may present a clinical picture greatly at variance with how
they actually feel or what they intend to do. They may move quickly and with
desperate ingenuity. As nineteenth-century psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin wrote in
his classic text, Manic-Depressive Insanity:
Only too often the patients know how to conceal their suicidal
intentions behind an apparently cheerful behaviour, and then carefully
prepare for the execution of their intention at a suitable moment. The
possibilities at their command are numerous. They may, while
deceiving the vigilance of the people round them, drown themselves in
the bath, hang themselves on the latch of the door, or on any projecting
corner in the watercloset, indeed even strangle themselves in bed
under the cover with a handkerchief or strips of linen. They may
swallow needles, nails, bits of broken glass, even spoons, drink up any
medicine, save up sleeping-powder and take it all at one time, throw
themselves downstairs, smash their skull with a heavy object and so
on. A female patient by sticking in pieces of paper managed to prevent
the upper part of a window, where there was no grating, being properly
shut, and then threw herself down from the second storey in an
unwatched moment. Another who was shortly to have been
discharged, was alone for a few minutes in the scullery; she took a
little bottle of spirit and a match from the cupboard, which had been
left open through negligence, and having poured the spirit over herself
set herself on fire.
In the 1930s, Gerald Jameison and James Wall, at Bloomingdale Hospital in
New York State, described the varieties of suicide methods used by patients in
their hospital: twisted cords round the neck; two neckties attached to plumbing
fixtures in the toilet; three handkerchiefs attached to the hinge of a closet door; a

curtain tied around the throat and then attached to a window sash; cut throats
from razors or window glass; and a cut femoral and radial artery with a piece of
glass from a tumbler. (Sylvia Plath, who had been hospitalized after a nearly
lethal suicide attempt, described in her autobiographical novel, The Bell Jar, the
guile attendant to suicidal thought: “A maid in a green uniform was setting the
tables for supper,” she wrote. “There were white linen tablecloths and glasses
and paper napkins. I stored the fact that they were real glasses in the corner of
my mind the way a squirrel stores a nut. At the city hospital we had drunk out of
paper cups and had no knives to cut our meat.”)
Hanging and jumping are by far the most common methods of suicide used by
psychiatric inpatients, and being under staff supervision is no guarantee against
self-inflicted injuries and death. Psychiatrists Jan Fawcett and Katie Busch, in a
Chicago-based study of patients who had committed suicide while in the
hospital, found that more than 40 percent had been on fifteen-minute checks at
the time they killed themselves. Fully 70 percent of those who killed themselves
had denied, prior to the act, any suicidal thinking or plans.
The reality of treating seriously ill and potentially suicidal patients is that
difficult clinical decisions have to be made each step of the way. When should a
patient first be taken off constant nursing observation and placed on fifteen- or
thirty-minute checks? At what point can a patient first be allowed off the ward
unaccompanied or given a pass to go home for the weekend? Prediction is
imperfect, and patients who are desirous of dying dissemble.
Research indicates that more than half the patients who kill themselves in
psychiatric hospitals had been described by nursing or medical staff, just before
their suicides, as “clinically improved” or “improving.” Indeed, nearly 50
percent of those who commit suicide while on a ward, or immediately after
discharge from the hospital, had been assessed as nonsuicidal at the time of
admission. The days early in hospitalization and those leading up to discharge
are particularly high-risk periods for suicide. The time prior to leaving the
hospital is often laden with concerns about rejection by family and friends,
loneliness, a still turbulent clinical course (often characterized by volatile mood
cycling and an exceedingly uncomfortable restlessness, agitation, and
irritability), concerns about job problems or unemployment, and fears about
being able to manage outside the hospital. Often caught in the dilemma of being
too well to be in the hospital but not well enough to deal with the realities and
stresses of life outside, as well as having to contend with the personal and
economic consequences of having a serious mental illness, patients sometimes
feel utterly hopeless and overwhelmed, and kill themselves. Hospitals can
provide sanctuary and medical care; they can save the lives of many who are

suicidal. But they cannot save everyone.

THE LION ENCLOSURE
The world goes by my cage and never sees me.
—RANDALL JARRELL,
“The Woman at the Washington Zoo”
THE CAUSE of death, said the medical examiner, was suicide: the dead woman had
died from sharp- and blunt-force injury associated with massive blood and soft-
tissue loss. No doubt this was true. More to the point, however, the thirty-six-
year-old woman with long dark hair had been mangled, shredded, and partially
eaten by one or both of the lions in their outdoor enclosure at the National Zoo in
Washington. Mauling was the reality. Mauling, with all of its attendant visual
horrors, was what people conjured. Not blunt-force injury. Not soft-tissue loss. A
woman was violently dead, in a manner handpicked and appalling.
Her body, still wet from swimming across a twenty-six-foot moat—only one
of several barriers separating the public from the four-hundred-pound cats—was
discovered by a zoo worker on a cold March morning in 1995. Face up,
mutilated beyond recognition, the body was dressed lightly for the winter day. It
lay on a grassy terrace near the place where the lions went for their usual
feeding; the arms and hands had been chewed off. Bite marks covered the
corpse. Certainly, as the medical examiner put it—certainly and terribly—“this
was not an instantaneous death.”
No one doubted the immediate cause of death. The lions, a young male and older
female, would have responded predictably to an intruder in their territory. Out of
curiosity or a sense of threat, instinct would dictate a deadly or near-deadly
outcome. No one questioned that the powerful and dangerous carnivores had
killed the young woman. The questions that, for a day or two, kept the nation’s
capital spellbound were, instead: Who was she? And why?
Intense public interest in the macabre circumstances of the woman’s death
provoked an inevitable round of speculation: Was it suicide? Murder? Had she
fallen into the lion enclosure by accident? The bizarreness of the circumstances,
the savagery of her death caught everyone’s imagination in the darkest, most
primitive of ways.

The Washington Post, in one of five stories it ran on the subject, captured the
city’s shock at the act: “Suddenly,” wrote journalist Phil McCombs, “this city of
smooth diplomacy with its false beaming smiles and barely sheathed fangs, this
town where Arafat and Rabin could shake hands and lobbyists blandly testify
under oath that their deadly products won’t harm you, this place of careful spins
and cloaked motives and paper death, was mesmerized by the sudden fierce
savagery of real slaughter.… It was, in a way, a death too simple for Washington
to swallow. By yesterday afternoon [two days after her death had been reported],
at least one caller to talk radio was speculating that the sad event at the zoo must
be related to the Whitewater investigation.”
The police, on the other hand, suggested on the basis of their own casing that
the woman’s decision to seek out the lion enclosure was somehow tied to her
religious ideas. Christians in ancient Rome, after all, as wages for their belief,
had been thrown to the lions, and Daniel, in the Old Testament, had come back
triumphant and whole from his test of faith in the lion’s den. Based on what later
came to be known about the dead woman’s history, it was as reasonable a guess
as most. Her mind, as further inquiry would show, was not entirely her own. She
shared it with voices and visions and other sundry by-products of madness.
Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel, and cast him
into the den of lions. Now the king spake and said unto Daniel, Thy
God whom thou servest continually, he will deliver thee.
And a stone was brought, and laid upon the mouth of the den; and
the king sealed it with his own signet, and with the signet of his lords.
—DANIEL, 6:16–17
The clues the woman left behind were fragmentary. Near her body,
investigators found a Sony Walkman that contained a cassette of Christian singer
Amy Grant’s “House of Love.” A barrette from her hair lay on the ground not far
from where the lions had killed her. Tucked into her shoes was a money order,
and a business letter was stuffed into a pocket. No suicide note was found and no
fingerprints remained.
An Arkansas Transit Authority bus pass identified the dead woman as
Margaret Davis King, a transient from Little Rock. Three days before her death
she had checked into a cheap hotel room in northwest Washington, where police
later discovered a single suitcase and scattered religious writings. Little emerged
about the last days of her life other than a quixotic late-afternoon visit she had
made to the U.S. District Court the day before she died. There, according to the

clerk who assisted her, King said she wanted to file a lawsuit to get her daughter
back.
It was soon clear to the clerk that King was mentally disturbed; she claimed to
be the sister of Jesus Christ and declared that she and Jesus had grown up
together in the same household with President Clinton. It was the president’s
intervention she now sought in her child custody case. King was, the clerk
reported, “clean, attractive, and well-spoken”; and although she seemed upset,
she was upset in a “controlled way.” In fact, the clerk said, she appeared “very
calm.” She quoted the Scriptures as she petitioned and clasped a packet of papers
to her chest.
She left the District Court building about 5 P.M., and no one knows what she did
or where she went until she entered the zoo and made her way to the lion and
tiger exhibit. She may have hesitated, but at some point she was certain enough
of her decision to climb over a three-and-a-half-foot barrier, walk across a buffer
zone of dirt, scramble down a nine-foot wall, and swim the moat to the grassy
home grounds of the lions. Who was she? And why?
Margaret Davis King, the medical examiner and journalists would discover,
was twice married and the mother of three young children. She was also an
honorably discharged veteran of the U.S. Navy, homeless, and a paranoid
schizophrenic. Over the years she had been confined to psychiatric hospitals in
California, Georgia, and Arkansas. She claimed to be not only the sister of Jesus
Christ but, on occasion, Jesus himself. As evidence of the latter, she would point
out what she thought to be nail holes in her hand from the Crucifixion. She said
she received messages directly from God and placed telephone calls to people in
cities across the country, commanding them to leave their homes and jobs and
follow her. God, she assured them, would provide their transportation.
She had been arrested for making threats and for aggravated assault. At one
point, according to the sheriff’s office in Arkansas, she swung a broomstick at a
deputy and told another officer to shoot her. She was hospitalized, released,
rehospitalized, and released yet again. She was prescribed medication that she
took for a while and then stopped. She had no governance over her thoughts,
there was no tolerable flow to her mood or energy. Gradually, the pattern of her
life became indistinguishable from that of tens of thousands of others with
schizophrenia; she became part of the urban netherlands, the homeless mentally
ill.
The lions had the mastery of them,
And brake all their bones in pieces.

—DANIEL, 6:24
We have filled these netherlands past any pretense of civilization; we have
swollen their ranks with the psychotic and the incapacitated, taken the hopeless
and made them more so, and then we have disregarded what they need to
survive. We have released the severely mentally ill onto our streets, and they
have come to make up a third to a half of our country’s homeless. They disturb
the well who share their streets and perplex city managers. They make us
uncomfortable, but not so uncomfortable that we protect or house, insure or tend
or heal them.
They die on the streets, in parking lots, in shelters, or in vacant buildings, in
the park or on the sidewalks. They die younger than the rest of us, and they die
of causes tied to neglect: tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS, hepatitis B, alcoholism and
drug abuse, and injuries. Nearly 10 percent kill themselves.
The decision to release psychiatric patients onto the streets was not a
malevolent one; it was just thoughtless and ill considered. The 1963 Community
Mental Health Centers Act, signed into law by President Kennedy, was meant to
counter the warehousing of the severely mentally ill in large institutions. It was
hoped that the newly available antipsychotic and antidepressant medications
would allow patients to return to their communities, and it was assumed, too
optimistically, that those communities would be able to—and want to—take care
of these patients. Society sent itself on a fool’s errand.
Richard Wyatt, chief of neuropsychiatry at the National Institute of Mental
Health, along with other physicians and scientists, has been a vehement critic of
the national execution of this consequential social policy, which hadn’t the
scientific basis to back it up. In a 1986 editorial in the journal Science, Wyatt
wrote:
America’s homeless crisis began in 1963 when deinstitutionalization
became law.… Hundreds of thousands of disabled patients with
schizophrenia, affective [mood] disorders, alcoholism, and severe
personality disorders were released from large institutions to the
streets. Once deinstitutionalized, those individuals created their own
communities of isolation, alienation, hopelessness, and despair. By
law, the former residents of structured institutions became the
homeless. This situation occurred because a social welfare movement,
based on virtually no scientifically gathered data, became public
policy. Remarkably, only one controlled pilot study performed in
England was available at the time the law was passed. The country

undertook a noble, but unfeasible, and ultimately unjustifiable project
because the essential research had not been done.
No one who treats schizophrenia or the homeless mentally ill would claim to
have the solution to such knotted and bewildering problems. Certainly, no one
could say why Margaret Davis King, homeless and schizophrenic, delusional,
and unlikely to recover custody of her children, would choose to end her life as
or when she did. Public interest in her death soon paled; quips about lions and
suicide made their way to Washington dinner parties. The capital city moved on.
King was unknown, little tolled, and less understood. Why did she die? Was
she despairing and beyond hope or exultantly psychotic and beyond fear? Why
did she choose such an awful way? We do not know these things; we do not
know her. She left only the slightest trail of human intimation. But for the public
recollection of zoo lions in a national park, there would have been an even
slighter trace, a fleeting chalk-out of just one of the million suicides in the world
that year.

III
Pangs of Nature, Taints of Blood
—THE BIOLOGY OF SUICIDE—
O, yet we trust that somehow good
Will be the final goal of ill,
To pangs of nature, sins of will,
Defects of doubt, and taints of blood.
—ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON
Generation after generation of the Tennyson family was afflicted with
debilitating melancholia, uncontrollable fits of rage, and manic-depression.
Alfred, Lord Tennyson (1809-1892), referred to the “black blood” of the
Tennysons, and the themes of suicide, suicidal despair, and inherited
madness are at the heart of some of his most powerful poetry.

CHAPTER 6
A Plunge into Deep Waters
—GENETIC AND EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVES—
It was, he said, a constitutional and a family evil, and one for which he
despaired to find a remedy.
—EDGAR ALLAN POE
But it is always a question whether I wish to avoid these glooms.…
These 9 weeks give one a plunge into deep waters.… One goes down
into the well & nothing protects one from the assault of truth.
—VIRGINIA WOOLF
PRECISELY ONE year before General Robert E. Lee surrendered the Confederate Army
of Northern Virginia to General Ulysses S. Grant at Appomattox Court House,
Professor John Ordronaux delivered a major lecture to the students of Columbia
College in New York. Human conduct, he told them, is not always the reflection
of human reason. Original instincts, “however much they may be modified by
intellectual culture, or repressed by circumstances forbidding their expression,
are rarely, if ever, entirely eradicated.” Nature, he said, quoting Francis Bacon,
“is often hidden, sometimes overcome, seldom extinguished.”
Ordronaux, although deeply affected, as were all his colleagues and fellow
citizens, by the Civil War, was not addressing it in his lecture. He was, rather,
speaking about the irrational and violent roots of an internal war, forces that
seemed to pass from one generation to the next. He was addressing at length and
with some vehemence the arguments for the inheritance of suicide. Like many
other midnineteenth-century doctors who treated mental illness, he was
impressed by the predisposing temperaments underlying both insanity and
suicide:
Observations show that the question of temperament enters quite
extensively into the problem of suicide. While the sanguine and

plethoric are predisposed to diseases of accelerated circulation, like
mania, and may, and often do commit acts of sudden frenzy, either
against others, or themselves, the nervous, bilious, and lymphatic
temperaments are those in whom the predisposition to suicide most
usually assumes the chronic and inveterate form. In them the morbid
tendency seems easily awakened and of difficult eradication; and when
slumbering as a predisposition, hereditarily transmitted, requires but a
slight exciting cause to develop itself into the full-blown malady. So
potent in fact is the influence of hereditary transmission in the
production of suicide, that not less than one-sixth of all recorded cases
have been directly traced to this source.
It is unclear where the “one-sixth” estimate came from as there were no
reliable figures then and only slightly better ones now. But certainly it had long
been believed—indeed, for more than two thousand years—that madness and
suicide run in families. And twenty-five years earlier, in 1840, British physician
Forbes Winslow had stated unequivocally, “With reference to suicide, there is no
fact that has been more clearly established than that of its hereditary character.
Of all diseases to which the various organs are subject, there is none more
generally transmitted from one generation to another than affections of the brain.
It is not necessary that the disposition to suicide should manifest itself in every
generation; it often passes over one, and appears in the next, like insanity
unattended with this propensity.”
Benjamin Rush, professor of medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, was
likewise impressed with the hereditary aspects of suicide and included in his
widely published and influential 1812 textbook, Medical Inquiries and
Observations upon the Diseases of the Mind, a letter he had received from a
colleague recounting a case of suicide in identical twin brothers:
Captains C. L. and J. L. were twin brothers, and so great was the
similarity in their countenances and appearance, that it was extremely
difficult for strangers to know them apart. Even their friends were
often deceived by them. Their habits and manners were likewise
similar. Many ludicrous stories are told of people mistaking one for the
other.
They both entered the American revolutionary army at the same
time. Both held similar commissions, and both served with honour
during the war. They were cheerful, sociable, and in every respect
gentlemen. They were happy in their families, having amiable wives

and children, and they were both independent in their property. Some
time after the close of the war, captain J. removed to the state of
Vermont, while captain C. remained in Greenfield [Massachusetts], in
the vicinity of Deerfield, and 200 miles from his brother. Within the
course of three years, they have both been subject to turns of partial
derangement, but by no means rising into mania, nor sinking into
melancholy. They appeared to be hurried and confused in their
manners, but were constantly able to attend to their business. About
two years ago, captain J. on his return from the general assembly of
Vermont, of which he was a member, was found in his chamber, early
in the morning, with his throat cut, by his own hand, from ear to ear,
shortly after which he expired. He had been melancholy a few days
previous to this fatal catastrophe, and had complained of indisposition
the evening previous to the event.
About ten days ago, captain C. of Greenfield, discovered signs of
melancholy, and expressed a fear that he should destroy himself. Early
in the morning of June fifth he got up, and proposed to his wife to take
a ride with him. He shaved himself as usual, wiped his razor, and
stepped into an adjoining room, as his wife supposed, to put it up.
Shortly after she heard a noise like water or blood running upon the
floor. She hurried into the room, but was too late to save him. He had
cut his throat with his razor, and soon afterwards expired.
The mother of these two gentlemen, an aged lady, is now in a state
of derangement, and their two sisters, the only survivors of their
family, have been subject, for several years, to the same complaint.
The assumed familial nature of suicide continued as a thread throughout much
of the nineteenth- and twentieth-century suicide literature. In June 1906, Charles
Pilgrim, the president of the New York Commission on Lunacy, read a paper to
the American Medico-Psychological Association in Boston. In it he declared,
“There is nothing more firmly established than the fact of the transmission of the
suicidal tendency. This tendency is not only very apt to reappear in the offspring
but it is not unusual for it to appear at the same age that it appeared in the parent,
and often the same means are sought to accomplish the end.” He went another
disturbing step: “Therefore, it seems reasonable to expect the accomplishment of
considerable good by the efforts of our own profession to prevent marriage
where any hereditary taint exists.”
Several pedigrees of families with heavy burdens of suicide appeared in the

medical literature at about the same time as Pilgrim’s remarks. Two British
physicians published four generations of a pedigree of a seafaring family that
was saturated with suicide and insanity: of sixty-five family members, six
committed suicide, four threatened it, eight were “markedly peculiar in mental
condition,” and six were “idiotic or insane.” The language of the doctors leaves
no doubt about their views: “The evil results in the case of Family C2 are
specially apparent, a deeply affected father having mated with an habitual
drunkard.… The rapid method of suicide has accounted for two of the cousins,
the asylum will protect Family C2 from further disasters, the antisocial
tendencies of Family C3 will diminish the chances of procreation, and Family C5
has begun badly, and will no doubt leave its mark in asylum records.”
In 1901, the Medical Record noted an even more alarming concentration of
suicides in one family:
A man named Edgar Jay Briggs, who hanged himself on his farm, near
Danbury, Connecticut, a few days ago, was almost the last surviving
member of a family which has practically been wiped out of existence
by suicide. The history of self-destruction in this family extends over a
period of more than fifty years, and in that time, so it is stated, at least
twenty-one of the descendants and collaterals of the original Briggs
suicide have taken their own lives. Among these were the great-
grandfather, grandfather, father, brother, and two sisters of the one just
dead.
More recently, in Iraq, five suicides—four by self-immolation and one by
gunshot—were reported in the two sisters, brother, and two nephews of a woman
who had herself attempted suicide by pouring kerosene over her body and
lighting a match.
Many other “suicide families” have been cited in the medical literature, but,
while compelling, they by no means establish a genetic basis for suicide. The
odd or striking case history is more likely to be noticed and written up for
scientific publication, and other factors—such as family exposure to suicide or
learning from another family member’s behavior that suicide is a tenable, even
desirable, way of handling the problems of life or illness—may be important as
well. Ferreting out a biological predisposition to suicide from psychological
influences is difficult. And even assuming that it can be shown that suicide is
hereditable, or partially so, new questions immediately arise: What exactly is
being genetically transmitted from one generation to the next? Are there specific
genes that make an individual more likely to commit suicide? Or is an increased

tendency to commit suicide due only to the passing on of the genetic
predispositions to the psychiatric conditions most intimately linked to suicide—
depression, manic-depression, schizophrenia, and alcoholism—all of which,
especially the mood disorders, we know to have a strong genetic basis? Are there
specific genes associated with certain aspects of temperament—impulsivity,
aggression, and violence—that we know also to be predictive of suicide? A
particularly lethal combination of genetic liabilities may well result from an
underlying volatile temperament mixed with, or triggered by, mania, psychosis,
or alcoholism.
Medicine and science have evolved several strategies to help unskein the
effects of heredity from influences of the environment: family studies, which
examine familial patterns of suicide and suicide attempts; twin studies, which
look at rates of suicide in identical and nonidentical twins; adoption studies,
which are designed to tease apart “nature-nurture” issues by comparing suicide
in adopted individuals with suicide in their biological and adopted relatives; and
molecular genetic studies, which look at alterations in specific genes in
individuals who do and do not commit suicide. Each of these strategies gives us
a different kind of information.
There have been more than thirty family studies of suicide, and almost all of
the ones completed in recent years find a greatly elevated rate of suicide and
suicidal behaviors in the family members of those who commit suicide and those
who make a serious attempt. In studies of children and adults, as well as in
studies of patients with psychiatric illness, those who commit suicide are at least
two or three times as likely to have a family history of suicide as those who do
not. Individuals who commit or attempt suicide in a violent manner—by
gunshot, hanging, or jumping—are particularly likely to have a strong family
history of suicide, often of violent suicide.
One of the most important and interesting of the family studies of suicide was
carried out by Janice Egeland and James Sussex in their work with the Old Order
Amish, a conservative Protestant religious sect that settled in southeastern
Pennsylvania in the early eighteenth century. The community is agrarian,
socially cohesive, and protected against many of the risk factors that ordinarily
permeate urban culture. Alcohol is prohibited; serious crime is essentially
nonexistent; and loneliness and isolation are relatively unusual due to the
emphasis on extended families living together in the same homes. Social support
is exceptionally strong, and unemployment is not a significant problem. Suicide
—known by the Amish as “the abominable sin” or “that awful deed”—is
socially unacceptable and strongly censured by the community; until recent
times, Amish who killed themselves were buried outside the boundaries of the

community cemetery.
The Amish have kept extensive genealogical and medical records of their
ancestors that extend back through thirty generations; because of this, Egeland
and Sussex were able to identify all of the suicides that occurred during the
hundred-year period between 1880 and 1980. Twenty-five of the twenty-six
confirmed suicides (92 percent) were diagnosed with depression or manic-
depression (of necessity, some of the symptoms of mania were culturally bound
and included, in addition to the more traditional diagnostic criteria, “racing one’s
horse and carriage too hard … buying or using machinery or other worldly items
… excessive use of the public telephone”), and most were situated in families
that had, for many generations, been suffused with mood disorders. Twenty of
the twenty-six suicides were by hanging, four by gunshot, and two by drowning.
Most of those who killed themselves were married with children, and most were
in the prime years of their life.
The most dramatic and scientifically interesting finding in the Amish study of
suicide was the extent to which the suicides clustered in only a few families. Just
four families accounted for 73 percent of all suicides; these, in turn, made up
only 16 percent of the total Amish population. The suicides clustered in families
with mood disorders, but most families with heavy loadings for mood disorders
did not show a heavy concentration of suicides. This tendency for suicides to
cluster in some families heavily loaded with depression and manic-depression
but for there to be many with mood disorders and no suicides was later
replicated in an Austrian study.
The evidence from family studies is suggestive of a genetic influence on
suicide but it is not conclusive. A clustering of suicides in a family may be due
to other, nongenetic factors as well: a child whose parent kills himself may suffer
extremely from the loss and, if inclined to depression, respond in a desperate and
similar way; exposure to violence or suicide may have a particularly deadly
impact upon some family members; or suicide may be imitated or learned as the
seemingly best solution to severe pain, privation, or stress. One way to tease out
environmental and psychological effects from genetic ones is to look at the rates
of suicide in identical and nonidentical twins.
Identical twins come from the same egg and therefore share the same genetic
material. Nonidentical twins, on the other hand, come from two eggs and share
only half their genes (in this sense, they are no different from their other
siblings). If genetic influences are present, one would expect a far higher
concordance rate for suicide—that is, if one twin commits suicide, the other does
as well—in identical twins than in nonidentical ones. This turns out to be true.
Alec Roy, a psychiatrist at the Veterans Administration Hospital in New

Jersey, has written more about the genetics of suicide than anyone else. He
recently reviewed all of the twin studies published in the psychiatric literature
and found nearly four hundred pairs in which at least one twin had completed
suicide. Of the 129 identical twin pairs, 17 committed suicide, and of the 270
nonidentical pairs, only 2 did. This, from a statistical point of view, was a highly
significant difference. In a different study, of attempted suicide, Roy found that
nearly 40 percent of identical twins whose co-twin had committed suicide
themselves attempted suicide; no surviving nonidentical twin did so. Recent
research from Australia found likewise: if one identical twin made a serious
suicide attempt, nearly 25 percent of the co-twins did as well; none of the
nonidentical twins did. The authors noted that although it could be argued that
identical twins share a closer psychological and social world than nonidentical
ones—they are, for example, more likely to dress alike and be treated in a
similar manner—the social and psychological closeness between nonidentical
twins was also very strong.
The concordance rate for suicide in identical twins, approximately 15 percent,
suggests several things. First, although the rate is much higher than it is for
nonidentical twins, it is not formidably high. Even in individuals who are
genetically most similar, the odds are overwhelming that if one identical twin
kills himself the other will not. Second, the concordance rate for suicide in
identical twins is far less than the concordance rate observed for manic-
depression (70 to 100 percent, depending on whether suicide and recurrent
depression are included as concordant diagnoses), or schizophrenia (40 to 50
percent). The genetic influence may simply be stronger in the severe mental
illnesses than it is in suicide. It is also possible that the devastating impact of
suicide on the surviving twin actually lessens the chances that he or she will
commit suicide, either because of a heightened awareness of the psychological
pain caused to others or because the twin is now more apt to seek out and receive
medical care.
The findings from the twin studies provide strong evidence for a genetic
effect, but family dynamics and other psychological issues inevitably confound
their interpretation. One way of further isolating environmental from genetic
influences is by conducting an adoption study. Individuals who are adopted share
their genes, but not their environment, with their biological parents; conversely,
they share their environment, but no genes, with their adoptive parents. Adoption
therefore creates a unique natural experiment. If there is a significant genetic
influence on suicide, one would expect a much higher rate of suicide in the
biological parents of adoptees who commit suicide than in the adoptive parents.
This is exactly what was found in two studies done in Denmark, a country that

for years has maintained excellent and comprehensive medical records.
The first study, based on all Copenhagen adoptions between 1924 and 1947,
revealed that fifty-seven of the adoptees eventually committed suicide. These
fifty-seven adoptees were matched with a control group of other adoptees for
such factors as age, sex, social class, and the amount of time spent in institutions
or with their biological parents. An extensive examination of the causes of death
in biological relatives established that twelve of the biological relatives of the
adoptees who committed suicide had also committed suicide; only two of the
biological relatives of the adoptees who had not committed suicide had killed
themselves (this was a highly significant statistical difference). None of the
adopting relatives of either the suicide or control group committed suicide.
Although the authors of the study found that only six of the twelve biological
relatives who committed suicide had had any contact with psychiatric services
and therefore concluded that the genetic predisposition for suicide may, at least
to some extent, be independent of major psychiatric disorders, this may or may
not be true. In the United States, for example, more than half of those who meet
the diagnostic criteria for mood disorders never seek or receive psychiatric
treatment.
In a second study of Danish adoptees, seventy-one adoptees were identified as
having suffered from a mood disorder. They were then matched with seventy-
one adoptees who had no history of psychiatric illness. Fifteen of the nineteen
suicides that occurred in the relatives of the two groups of adoptees occurred in
the biological relatives of the adoptees suffering from depression or manic-
depression. The rate of suicide in biological relatives was especially high in
adoptees who had a strongly impulsive quality to their depressive episodes.
Together, the family, twin, and adoption studies make a strong case for a
strong genetic influence on suicide and suicidal behaviors. Genes are, of course,
only a part of the tangle of suicide, but their collision with psychological and
environmental elements can prove, as we shall see later, to be the difference
between life and death.
If suicide has a genetic underpinning and the illnesses most associated with it—
depression, manic-depression, schizophrenia, and alcoholism—have even
stronger ones, it is natural to ask why—with all their pain, maladaptiveness, and
early death—they should survive in the gene pool at such high rates. Is there any
evolutionary reason for suicide, or is it simply random splicings of and
realignments in DNA? Is it the result of a deadly interaction between a stressful
world and vulnerable wiring, or is there some common element that drives both

life and death? Is suicide always conscious and therefore a uniquely human
behavior, or do we share with other animals the capacity for self-destructiveness
and the deliberate ending of life? How, in short, does suicide fit into and serve
the rest of the natural world?
The construing of suicidal acts as consciously determined and therefore
uniquely human is both obvious and problematic, as psychiatrists Ivor Jones and
Brian Barraclough point out:
Suicide poses a special problem in relating animal studies to man: man
can visualize his death and arrange it, no animal has ever been shown
to do that. In this sense suicide is uniquely human. However, this
formulation implies that the processes leading to suicide are rational,
which may be untrue: depression in most suicides probably impairs the
capacity for rational thought while at the same time inducing suicide
impulses. We suggest that suicide may be a uniquely human attribute
only because our definition of it makes it so; in other words, if suicide
were to be defined as a destructive act inflicted on the self leading to
death, then animal analogies do exist. However, even by this changed
definition, man’s suicide and animal self-destruction are different in
the following ways: Man may defer the event, the animal does not.
Man may use an instrument, the animal does not. Man may manipulate
his environment to do the act for him, the animal does not. It seems,
therefore, that if animal behaviour is relevant to suicide it provides
only one component—a disposition to self-injury—which becomes
incorporated into a syndrome with other uniquely human components.
No one disputes that some animals under conditions of acute stress—isolation,
overcrowding, confinement, alterations in habitat—inflict great damage, even
death, upon themselves. They may gnaw through their limbs or tails, gouge out
their eyes, otherwise mutilate their bodies, or ceaselessly bang their heads
against the walls of their enclosure. Severe self-inflicted injuries and death from
stress have been reported in many zoo animals, including deer, lions, hyenas, and
jackals; in a variety of captive primate species; in mice, rats, octopi, opossums,
platypuses, and numerous other animals; and in domestic pets when separated
from their owners. Macaque monkeys will slap and bang their heads and use
their teeth and claws to gash their limbs and body. On occasion, domestic pigs
and some wild animals, when captured or transferred to new environments,
make violent attempts to escape; if unable to get away, a few fall into a stupor.
Many ranch mink chew through their tails when kept in captivity.

The most severe forms of self-injury in animals seem to occur when a
confined animal or an animal reared in isolation encounters acute stress; this in
turn typically precipitates an agitated, aggressive, or frustrated state. “In all
known instances,” Ivor Jones says, “the severe class of self-injury and some
headbanging is associated with acute agitation.” The agitation and frustration
appear to arise from limitations in the type and extent of physical activity,
alterations in or elimination of usual feeding and grooming behaviors, or a lack
of social or sexual contact with other animals. Acute agitated states can also be
induced surgically or pharmacologically by creating lesions in the brain or by
administering drugs and alcohol.
To some extent, self-injurious behavior in animals substitutes for the
aggression normally directed at other animals or energy that would otherwise be
expended in coping with the natural world. Self-injuries also seem reduce the
level of acute agitation experienced by the animal, in a way not dissimilar to the
defusing of tension that allows self-mutilative or cutting behavior in humans
who suffer from particular forms of psychopathology (such as borderline
personality disorder). Severe social isolation and confinement in humans, such
as that experienced by prisoners, can lead to analogous destructive behavior.
Prisoners, for example, have amputated their toes, fingers, and genitals;
occasional disembowelings have also been reported.
Overcrowding in the wild also often results in behaviors that end in injury or
death for an individual animal. Rats, when too populous for the environment in
which they find themselves, exhibit grossly abnormal behavior: aggression
increases precipitously, as do premature deaths; fertility declines in adaptation to
dwindling resources; and maternal behavior, including nest building, suffers.
Cannibalism occasionally erupts, as it does in frogs and alligators and other
species when they become too densely populated. Snowshoe hares, even when
removed from overcrowded spaces and placed in safe environments with plenty
of food and water, often die from stress and refusing to eat. Prolonged
psychopathology is rarely observed among animals other than humans, because,
as primatologist Henry Harlow and his colleagues point out, such animals do not
survive very long in the natural world.
Lemmings, the poster animals for suicide, do not in fact commit suicide. They
do, however, abandon highly populated areas, and in the course of their
migrations to new, less densely populated sites, many die. Their deaths are an
inevitable price of their travels to new lands. This dispersal of animals, which
both extends their territorial range and ultimately increases their genetic
diversity, is advantageous to the species but not necessarily to the individual: the
lemmings’ “suicidal march to the sea” is in no meaningful sense suicidal.

Animals engage in risky behaviors other than emigration to new territories.
Years ago, Harvard biologist E. O. Wilson set out the case for “altruistic”
behaviors, demonstrating that some animals sacrifice their own shelter or food to
close kin. The enhanced survival of kin in turn makes more likely the survival of
the family genes. In social insects, for example, protection of the group by
soldier wasps or ants may bring death to the individual but, through that death
and others, allow the group to survive. Animals that travel in herds, such as
bison or elk, often protect their young by surrounding them with older and
stronger members of the group. The mountain gorilla, which travels in a small
social group, uses subordinate males to protect the infants and females. These
animals, which stand guard at the edges or position themselves between
predators and the group’s most vulnerable, are necessarily at risk of injury or
death.
Within most species, including humans, there is a range in the ability and
willingness to take such risks. Temperaments and capacities vary. Some animals
move faster and are more curious, more impulsive, more restless. Highly
energetic, grasping, and aggressive, they are drawn to new regions, different
foods, and disparate mates. Others wait, stand back, move collectively, and act
less impetuously. The diversity of styles and temperaments serves the needs of
the group, allowing it, as necessary, to push forward, or pull back, or to expand
or conserve its collective energies.
Like other animals, human beings are diverse in their capacities and
temperaments. Adaptive behaviors lurch with dispatch into maladaptive ones, a
perhaps inevitable price that must be paid for a biological system that maintains
the capacity to ratchet its responses—flight, aggression, cooperation—rapidly to
survive in a changing or dangerous environment. The balance between adaptive
and pathological is often a tottery one, and it makes evolutionary sense that it
should be so. George Schaller observed in his studies of the Serengeti lion and
its prey that “a galloping animal is precariously balanced”: speed is necessary to
save life but carries with it the risk of losing it.
Aggression, likewise, is subject to jeopardous overshoot. “We are strongly
predisposed to slide into deep, irrational hostility under certain definable
conditions,” writes E. O. Wilson in On Human Nature. “With dangerous ease
hostility feeds on itself and ignites runaway reactions that can swiftly progress to
alienation and violence. Aggression does not resemble a fluid that continuously
builds pressure against the walls of its containers, nor is it like a set of active
ingredients poured into an empty vessel. It is more accurately compared to a
preexisting mix of chemicals ready to be transformed by specific catalysts that
are added, heated, and stirred at some later time.” Human beings, he continues,

“are strongly predisposed to respond with unreasoning hatred to external threats
and to escalate their hostility sufficiently to overwhelm the source of the threat
by a respectably wide margin of safety.”
We have, then, within ourselves the capacity for extremes that will serve us
well on occasion and badly on others. These extremes encompass not only rage
and aggression but sadness and ecstasy, inertia and frenzied energy states,
dullness and exploration. But why should the proclivity for suicide survive?
Why do the genes and the volatile brain chemistry that underlie the suicidal
potential remain in our genetic makeup? Is suicide a part of the price we pay for
diversity? Are the reckless and impulsive behaviors associated with many acts of
suicide also associated with capacities integral to the survival of the species? Or
do these pathologies exist independent of any adaptive value? The fact that a
condition is widespread does not necessarily mean that it is adaptive.
The recently emerging field of evolutionary psychiatry has been looking at an
important and closely related question: Why do the severe psychiatric illnesses
—schizophrenia, manic-depression, and depression—persist in humans? The
persistence of the genes for schizophrenia—a terrible, debilitating, and painful
disease—is perplexing. It would seem that over tens of thousands of years,
protection against or elimination of such a maladaptive genetic mutation should
have occurred. Yet schizophrenia not only survives, it survives at a relatively
high rate, in 1 percent of the population. Why? Some have argued that perhaps
the same cognitive and social behaviors that, in their extreme forms, mark or
destroy the lives of those with schizophrenia—bizarre and unpredictable
thinking, strange or altered patterns of attention, paranoia, resistance to physical
pain, acute sensory awareness, intense apprehension, isolation from others,
resistance to certain inflammatory disorders or the infectious agents that precede
them—may in their milder forms (watchfulness, novel thought, a heightened
attentiveness to possible danger) have benefits not only to individuals but, if in
an attenuated form, to their kin. Timothy Crow, a psychiatrist at the University of
Oxford, creatively and controversially argues that language and psychosis have a
common evolutionary origin and that schizophrenia may be the price that Homo
sapiens pays for having language.
It is easier to understand, and more vigorously argued by many, that mood
disorders may give an advantage to both individuals and their societies.
Depression, characterized as it is by a conservation of energy during times of
scant resources, a reduction of activity at times of nonnegotiable threat, or a
slowing or cessation of sexual behavior when environmental conditions are poor,
is a not surprising biological reaction during times of change or stress. Its
existence in mild forms may act as an alerting mechanism to other animals to act

similarly and may, as some have argued, help to maintain a stable social
hierarchy as well. (Less dominant animals, for example, may submit to more
dominant ones in order to increase their own chances for survival and
reproduction.) The discontents and darkness of the depressive mind may also
create—through the arts and philosophy—a useful perspective in the collective
social awareness.
It is the temperamental, cognitive, and behavioral elements of manic-
depressive illness that provide the strongest evidence for a possible link between
the infrequent adaptive advantages of a severe illness, on the one hand, and
suicide, on the other. American poet Anne Sexton, who committed suicide after
a long struggle with manic-depression and alcoholism, wrote in one of her
poems that high-flying Icarus
… glances up and is caught, wondrously tunneling into that hot eye.
Who cares that he fell back to the sea?
The “wondrous tunneling” into the sun and subsequent falling back into the sea
conjure an image of the dangerous relationship between exploration and
recklessness. Mania, we know, is an aggressive and volatile state, but it is
generative as well, an influential condition of contagious enthusiasms and
energies. The elements that in part define mania—fearlessness, a fast and broad
scattering of thoughts, an expansiveness of moods and ideas, utter certainty, the
taking of inadvisable risks—often carry with them the power both to destroy and
to create. When the high-voltage manic brain slows, as it must, and its mood
seeps down into depression, the crackling together of manic impetuousness with
a black mood can be lethal. Suicide is the not-uncommon end point of a short-
lived, violent, and yet, on occasion, fertile time.
The boldness and violence of the manic temperament may come at a cost, but
there is strong evidence that manic-depression and its milder forms can provide
advantages to the individual, his or her kin, and society at large. (An interviewer
once asked me if a manic was not perhaps the first to throw a spear into the heart
of a mastodon. The mastodon may have been brought down, but so too may have
been the manic.) Several studies have shown that both manic-depressive patients
and their relatives are uncommonly creative and academically successful. At
least twenty studies have found that highly creative individuals are much more
likely than the general population to suffer from depression and manic-
depressive illness. Clearly, mood disorders are not required for great
accomplishment, and most people who suffer from mood disorders are not
particularly accomplished. But the evidence is compelling that the creative are

disproportionately affected by these conditions.
Suicide is also more common in highly creative or successful writers, artists,
scientists, and businessmen than it is in the general population. Most are related
to underlying depression, manic-depression, or alcoholism in combination with
these mood disorders. Percy Bysshe Shelley, who attempted suicide when
young, said, “But mark how beautiful an order has sprung from the dust and
blood of this fierce chaos,” and this perhaps is true. Extremes in emotions and
thinking, when tightly yoked with a disciplined mind and high imagination,
certainly can advance the arts, sciences, and commerce. Suffering that may
benefit a work of art or move the direction of a spiritual life—“Is the shipwrack
then a harvest,” asked Gerard Manley Hopkins, “does tempest / carry the grain
for thee?”—may not be of such benefit to the life of the artist. Immoderate
thought, and behavior on the remotest ridges of experience, may end in death,
yet some artists and explorers feel no choice but to go there. The pull between a
life at the extremes and one in more moderate zones is fierce for many. “It isn’t
possible to get values and color,” wrote Vincent van Gogh. “You can’t be at the
pole and the equator at the same time. You must choose your own line, as I hope
to do, and it will probably be color.”
The toll of suicide on artists, writers, scientists, mathematicians, and others
strongly influential on their societies is powerful. The rates of suicide in these
groups have been examined in a series of studies conducted by researchers in the
United States, Britain, Europe, and Asia. Eminent scientists, composers, and top
businessmen were, in these investigations, five times more likely to kill
themselves than the general population; writers, especially poets, showed
considerably higher rates. Many of the artists, writers, and scientists who
committed suicide are listed in the endnotes; the list is a long and disturbing one
and gives credence to these lines from Dylan Thomas:
The hand that whirls the water in the pool
Stirs the quicksand; that ropes the blowing wind
Hauls my shroud sail.

CHAPTER 7
Death–Blood
—NEUROBIOLOGY AND NEUROPATHOLOGY—
I have a violence in me that is hot as death-blood. I can kill myself or
—I know it now—even kill another. I could kill a woman, or wound a
man. I think I could. I gritted to control my hands, but had a flash of
bloody stars in my head as I stared that sassy girl down, and a blood-
longing to [rush] at her and tear her to bloody beating bits.
—SYLVIA PLATH
EVERYWHERE IN the snarl of tissue that is the brain, chemicals whip down fibers, tear
across cell divides, and continue pell-mell on their Gordian rounds. One hundred
billion individual nerve cells—each reaching out in turn to as many as 200,000
others—diverge, reverberate and converge into a webwork of staggering
complexity. This three-pound thicket of gray, with its thousands of distinct cell
types and estimated one hundred trillion synapses, somehow pulls out order from
chaos, lays down the shivery tracks of memory, gives rise to desire or terror,
arranges for sleep, propels movement, imagines a symphony, or shapes a plan to
annihilate itself.
From its beginning in the DNA architecture twisted within a single cell, the
brain owes its development not only to the tens of thousands of genes it inherits,
but also to the constantly shifting environment within which it finds itself. While
still in the womb, the brain’s evolution is beholden to a mother’s actions and
experiences: if she drinks too much or smokes, eats poorly, or uses drugs, if she
is infected by a damaging virus or bacterium, or if she is greatly stressed, the
fetal brain registers the effects.
If susceptible genes are exposed to one of these additional stresses, or “second
hits,” from the prenatal environment, a lasting cost—certain forms of mental
retardation or epilepsy, perhaps even autism or schizophrenia—may arise. Once
a child is born, its exposure or lack of exposure to stimulation from its
environment—through sounds, light, shapes, movement, nutrition, touch, and

smell—determines which brain cells are pruned and which networks of nerve
cells are put into place. The molding of the circuitry of the brain, the formation
of its pathways and connections, will remain throughout an individual’s life a
product of both inheritance and experiences derived from interactions with the
world.
The essence of the brain, its nerve cells (or neurons), communicate with one
another electrochemically by sending information out across fibers called axons.
These axons branch off into a number of small fibers that end in terminals;
between terminals are the slight gaps known as synapses, across which messages
are sent. Electrical stimulation of a nerve cell causes the release of
neurotransmitters—such as norepinephrine, glutamate, acetylcholine, dopamine,
and serotonin—from storage areas in vesicles located at the end of the neuron.
The release of these neurotransmitters into the space between the nerve cells
allows the transfer of information from cell to cell.
Neurotransmitters are the lifeblood of the brain, governing the interactions
from cell to cell, brain region to brain region, and brain to body. No one knows
how many transmitters there are, nor does anyone fully understand the actions of
the more than one hundred identified to date. We are only just learning about the
profusion of transmitters that exist, and we have only the merest notion of their
tangled relationships with one another. For scientists to focus on one or two
substances at the expense of the others known or yet to be discovered, or to
minimize the complexity of the chemical interactions within the brain or at the
synapses, would be a damning mistake, a late-twentieth-century equivalent of
earlier, primitive views that deranged minds were caused by satanic spells or an
excess of phosphorous and vapors.
Many neurotransmitters and hormones are critical to the regulation of mood
and to the activation of the many behaviors involved in suicide. It is impossible
to discuss or even mention all of them here. The primary focus here is on only
one of the dozens of transmitters known to be involved in the complex activities
of the brain, serotonin, but it is a central one and illustrative of the role of the
brain’s chemistry in suicide and suicidal behaviors.
Serotonin, a chemical found in plants as well as in ancient invertebrate
nervous systems, is widespread in the bodies and brains of mammals, including
humans. It acts in diverse ways: it controls the diameter of blood vessels, affects
pain perception, influences the gut, plays a role in the body’s inflammatory
responses, and causes platelets to clump. More significant from a psychiatric and
psychological perspective, however, serotonin is deeply implicated in the roots
of depression, sleep regulation, aggression, and suicide.
Several lines of evidence link abnormalities in serotonin functioning to

suicidal behavior. First, we have known for a long time that the
neurotransmitters serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine are intricately
involved with the origins of mood disorders, and we have also known that drugs
that have an impact on these transmitters can precipitate or ameliorate
depression or mania. Reserpine, a drug derived from the plant Rauwolfia
serpentina, furnished an early illustration of this phenomenon. Used centuries
ago in India as a remedy for insomnia and insanity and more recently in this
century as a treatment for psychosis and high blood pressure, the drug had a
disturbing effect on some patients who took it. A significant number became
profoundly depressed; as it was subsequently shown, the depression was due to a
dramatic depletion in the brain of serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine.
In the mid-1950s a quite opposite clinical observation was made. Some
patients who were being treated for tuberculosis with a drug called iproniazid
became strangely cheerful and animated; despite their grim circumstances and
prognoses, they were almost defiantly optimistic. A few were strikingly
euphoric. It was not long before iproniazid, pinpointed by the clinicians and
scientists who were studying it as the cause of the mood elevation, was in
widespread use as an antidepressant. In short order the mechanism of its action
was discovered: it worked because it inhibited the action of monoamine oxidase,
an enzyme that inactivates norepinephrine, serotonin, and dopamine after they
have been released at nerve synapses. This inhibition of monoamine oxidase in
effect increased the availability of the neurotransmitter substances. It was
becoming clear to researchers that the availability and distribution of
neurotransmitters were critical to the expression and regulation of mood. This
was underscored by Nobel laureate Julius Axelrod’s discovery that another
antidepressant, imipramine (a tricyclic antidepressant, also known as Tofranil),
worked by inhibiting the reuptake of neurotransmitters from the synaptic cleft
back into the synapse that had first released them, thus increasing their
availability.
More recently, the “third-generation antidepressants,” drugs that act much
more specifically on individual neurotransmitters, have not only radically altered
clinical practice by their widespread popularity and use but have also provided
further evidence for the role of neurotransmitters in the origins or perpetuation of
depression. Classified as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, they act
primarily by blocking the removal of the serotonin at the synapses. This in turn
increases the availability of serotonin in the brain.
In addition to the link between neurotransmitters and depression, there is
another line of evidence implicating serotonin in suicidal behavior; this is its
entanglement with impulsive behavior, aggression, and violence. We know from

studies of rodents and nonhuman primates that if the availability of serotonin is
curtailed or its transmission impeded, animals become more aggressive and
impulsive. Rats with low serotonin levels attack and kill other rodents, and
“knockout” mice—mice that are lacking a gene necessary for normal serotonin
functioning—attack faster, acquire addictions more quickly, and press levers
more rapidly and erratically. Rats and other animals selectively bred for docility,
on the other hand, have higher levels of serotonin.
Monkeys with low levels of serotonin’s breakdown product, 5-
hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA)—a metabolite that is presumed to reflect
serotonin functioning in the central nervous system—are far more likely than
those with higher levels to assault other monkeys, increase their alcohol intake,
and engage in highly risky behaviors such as leaping long distances at perilous
heights. If serotonin levels in monkeys or other animals are artificially elevated
by drugs or by adding tryptophan (a precursor of serotonin) to their diets, their
aggressive and impulsive behaviors sharply decrease.
Psychologist J. Dee Higley and his colleagues at the National Institute on
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism followed the lives of forty-nine free-ranging
rhesus monkeys on a South Carolina sea island. When the monkeys were two
years old, the scientists measured their 5-HIAA levels by drawing samples of
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The animals were ranked from lowest to highest in
their levels of aggression, and a record was made of all existing scars and
wounds. Four years later, the scientists recaptured and reassessed the animals.
Eleven of the monkeys were dead or presumed missing; the correlation between
the primates’ survival and their 5-HIAA levels was stunning. Nearly half of the
monkeys with low CSF 5-HIAA concentrations, as determined at the initial
assessment when the monkeys were two years old, had died as a result of
violence. None of the monkeys with high concentrations had died or was
missing. Low levels of serotonin were predictive not only of premature death but
of excessive aggression and risk taking as well.
Studies of serotonin levels and violence are of direct relevance to humans,
who share with other group-living primates most of the genes that are involved
in violent, aggressive, and impulsive behavior. And as Higley and other
primatologists point out, nonhuman primates and humans share many critical
infant-rearing patterns, relatively stable personality traits, and similar serotonin
pathways and chemistries. Serotonin functioning in the central nervous system,
as measured by CSF 5-HIAA, appears to be an enduring trait in individual
animals and humans, and it correlates well with impulsive and aggressive
behavior. Interestingly, however, Higley and his collaborators conclude from
their primate studies that low CSF 5-HIAA concentrations are not correlated

with rates of aggression in a simple way. They are correlated only with
aggression that is impulsive and unrestrained. High rates of impulsive behavior,
the scientists believed, were associated with “severe, unrestrained aggression,
but not with competitive, restrained aggression used to maintain social status or
aggression that seldom escalated out of control.”
Primates with low CSF 5-HIAA levels are not only more likely to be
inappropriately aggressive, they are not well accepted by their peers and they are
less likely to breed. Often forced to live apart from their natural social groups,
many end up living in isolation. The impact of serotonin functioning on
aggression and social behavior is powerful and potentially life-threatening. An
animal’s biology, behavior, and physical and social environments link together
and influence one another in complex and subtle ways we are just beginning to
understand.
There are many lines of evidence to suggest that serotonin functioning in the
brain is determined by both genetic and environmental factors. Genes certainly
are important. Rhesus monkeys separated from their biological parents and
raised by an unrelated “wet nurse” monkey have CSF 5-HIAA levels similar to
those of their biological parents. Impulsivity and aggressiveness are strongly
heritable in both humans and other animals. And specific genes (such as the
tryptophan hydroxylase, or TPH, gene) have been isolated that appear to be
involved in CSF 5-HIAA concentrations, as well as being associated with
impulsivity and suicide attempts.
But rearing patterns and the social environment exert a strong influence as
well. Adult male vervet monkeys, for example, appear to show a day-to-day
consistency in their blood serotonin concentrations as long as they are living in
stable group environments. When there is a shift in a group’s dominance pattern,
however, the transition from a lower to a higher position is accompanied by an
increase in serotonin. When dominant male vervet monkeys are isolated in cages
and have no visual or tactile contact with other members of their group, their
serotonin concentrations drop by 50 percent. If they are returned to their original
social group, their serotonin concentrations rise to their original levels.
Studies of rhesus monkeys have shown the importance of maternal influences
on serotonergic functioning and social behavior. If infant monkeys are separated
at birth from their mothers and reared with other infants of their own age—thus
allowed to grow up without any adult influence on their behavior—several
things happen. First, they are unable to control their impulses as well as
monkeys that are raised by their mothers: their aggression escalates out of
control much more quickly; they are more likely to consume alcohol in excess;
and they are more likely to be aggressive toward infant monkeys. They also have

more difficult relationships with their peers and are more likely to be wounded
and to have to be removed from their social group.
The mother clearly plays an important modulating role in the infant’s
developing serotonergic system. Critically, when the CSF 5-HIAA levels of peer-
raised monkeys are examined, they are significantly lower than in monkeys
raised by their mothers. If the peer-raised monkeys are given serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (antidepressant drugs that increase the availability of serotonin in the
brain), their levels of aggressiveness and alcohol intake are reduced. While it is
unlikely that any single explanation, such as elevated or decreased serotonergic
functioning, can begin to explain the highly complex chemical events and
interacting neurotransmitter systems in the brain, primate experiments provide
an exceptionally interesting and valuable way of looking at aggressive and self-
destructive behaviors.
The evidence is strong that serotonin inhibits violent, aggressive, and
impulsive behavior, but what do we know about the connection between these
behaviors and suicide? Several lines of observation converge to support a
compelling association. First, we know that suicidal acts are often impulsive;
that is, they are undertaken without much forethought or regard for consequence.
More than half of suicide attempts occur within the context of a premeditation
period of less than five minutes, and many researchers and clinicians, as well as
patients who survive medically serious suicide attempts, lay stress on the role of
impulse in the decision to commit suicide. (Although many suicidal patients
have well-formulated plans for suicide, the ultimate timing and final decision to
act are often determined by impulse.) Professional handwriting analysts, when
asked to distinguish between suicide notes written by those who have actually
committed suicide and notes using the same wording but written by nonsuicidal
individuals, are easily and consistently able to differentiate the two groups; the
writing of those who kill themselves is judged by the graphologists to be highly
“impulsive,” “aggressive,” and “agitated.”
Suicidal patients, in addition to being more impulsive, are also more likely to
commit violent or aggressive acts than nonsuicidal patients. In one English
study, those who actually killed themselves were three times more likely to have
had a history of violent behavior than individuals matched with them for age,
gender, and social class. The argument for a relationship between violence and
suicide is further bolstered by many international investigations that demonstrate
that homicide is frequently followed by suicide. In England and Wales, for
example, murder is followed by suicide 33 percent of the time. Most other
countries show high murder-suicide rates as well: Denmark (42 percent),
Australia (22 percent), and Iceland (9 percent). (However, in countries with very

high homicide rates and easy access to firearms, such as the United States, the
murder-suicide rate is much lower—for example, 1 to 2 percent in North
Carolina and Los Angeles and 4 percent in Philadelphia.)
In addition to the evidence for a relationship between violence and suicide,
there is evidence of heightened irritability and violence in several of the major
psychiatric conditions most associated with suicide. Although the majority of
people who suffer from depression, manic-depressive illness, schizophrenia, or
personality disorders are not more violent than the rest of the population, there
are some phases of illness that are not infrequently accompanied by physical
violence. This is particularly true for the acutely paranoid and agitated phase of
schizophrenia and for the mixed states associated with manic-depressive illness
and for mania itself. Nearly 50 percent of all manic episodes are characterized by
at least one act of physical violence; this proclivity to violence is further
compounded by the drinking that frequently accompanies mania. Extreme
irritability is also a hallmark of mood disorders, present in 80 percent of episodes
of mania and depression and virtually always during mixed states.
Given the connection between neurotransmitter functioning and depression
and the impressive series of studies demonstrating a link between serotonin
functioning and impulsive, aggressive behaviors, it is not surprising that clinical
researchers next turned to comparing serotonin functioning in suicidal and
nonsuicidal psychiatric patients. The result of their studies were unexpectedly
consistent. In fact, one of the most replicated findings in psychiatric research is
the association between suicide risk and low levels of CSF 5-HIAA, the
serotonin metabolite. Although some scientists have questioned the methods and
findings, more than twenty studies document that across diagnostic groups
(mood disorders, alcoholism, personality disorders, and schizophrenia), low
concentrations of CSF 5-HIAA are associated with a significant increase in
suicide risk. The lifetime severity of aggressive behaviors and the severity of
suicide attempts both are correlated with CSF 5-HIAA levels.
Marie Åsberg and her colleagues at the Karolinska Institute in Sweden, as
well as scientists from other countries, have shown, for instance, that if CSF 5-
HIAA is measured in patients with mood disorders after they have attempted
suicide, those with very low concentrations of the serotonin metabolite are far
more likely to be dead from suicide within a year than are those with higher
levels. It is possible that a low CSF 5-HIAA level is correlated with a tendency
to act impulsively and violently while in acute emotional turmoil or during a
severe episode of psychiatric illness.
Low CSF 5-HIAA levels are found in many psychiatric and behavioral
syndromes other than heightened suicidality, but most of them, like suicide, are

associated with problems of impulse control: for example, children who are
impetuously aggressive or who are cruel to animals; alcoholics who are
particularly aggressive, even when sober; depressed patients with histories of
marked argumentativeness, frequent clashes with colleagues or employers, or
sporadic contacts with the police; individuals with bulimia or Gilles de la
Tourette’s disease; and impulsive arsonists or others who engage in a pattern of
impulsive criminal behaviors. People who are highly obsessive and inhibited, on
the other hand, such as those suffering from anorexia nervosa or obsessive-
compulsive disorder, tend to have relatively elevated levels of CSF 5-HIAA.
(Interestingly, obsessive-compulsive disorder, unless it is accompanied by severe
depression, is one of the few major psychiatric illnesses that do not seem to
place their sufferers at an increased risk for suicide.) Smoking cigarettes, which
is far more common in those who commit suicide than those who do not—and
also more common in patients with schizophrenia, alcoholism, depression, and
antisocial personality disorder—appears to be associated with low CSF 5-HIAA
levels. It is unclear whether smoking causes the reduction or a low level of
serotonin functioning increases the likelihood that an individual will take up or
persist in smoking.
The association between serotonin and suicide is further supported by
postmortem studies of the brains of individuals who have killed themselves. The
evidence is strong that there are serotonin abnormalities in the prefrontal cortex
of the brain, an area strongly implicated in the inhibition of behavior. Reduced
serotonergic functioning in this part of the brain may cause disinhibition, which
may in turn result in acting precipitously on suicidal thoughts and feelings.
The number of noradenergic neurons in the brains of completed suicides also
appears to be markedly depleted, suggesting a pathology in the circuitry of
norepinephrine, a transmitter implicated in sleep regulation, depression,
attention, and the sleep-wake cycle. These changes in the noradenergic system
may be due to abnormalities in the development of the brain or to the effects of
acute or chronic stress. An acute or chronic stress, such as depression,
alcoholism, or a shattering emotional setback, may trigger the serotonergic
vulnerability, precipitating a lethal cascading of biological events within the
brain.
The hypothalamus, pituitary, and adrenal glands are primary actors in
generating the chemicals regulating the body’s response to stress. Under normal
circumstances, the release of stress hormones such as cortisol and adrenaline
(epinephrine) will increase heart rate, suppress hunger, and pulse more blood to
the muscles; in short, it will mobilize an animal’s adaptive response to stress.
But if for some reason—early trauma, genetic factors, mental illness—this stress

response cannot be shut off, the result may be prolonged and dangerous. Rats, if
subjected to stressful experiences at the time of birth or prematurely separated
from their mothers, may show irreversible social and cognitive damage. If, on
the other hand, rat pups are exposed to more intensive grooming and licking
from their mothers, their later ability to learn, explore, and interact with other
rats is enhanced.
In humans, a hyperactive stress response, which is set into play by both
biological factors and experience, may adversely affect mood, immune activity,
and serotonin functioning. Pathological levels of anxiety and agitation, both
implicated in suicide, are not uncommon. Autopsy studies of suicide victims
reveal evidence of hyperactivity in the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenocortical
axis, lending further support to the role of stress in suicide.
Scientists have repeatedly found significant brain pathology when conducting
imaging studies (pictures taken of the brain, such as positron-emission
tomography, or PET, scans) of the anatomy and functioning of the brains of
patients with depression, schizophrenia, or manic-depression—showing, for
example, in bipolar patients that there is an enlargement of the amygdala, which
is involved in generating emotions and regulating mood; an increase in white-
matter lesions, known as hyperintensities, which are associated with the water
content of brain tissue; and severe depletions in the number of glial cells, which
are involved in the development of the brain and also provide growth factors and
nutrients to the nerve cells—and it is possible that repeated psychosis or
depression may exacerbate the already fragile chemistry of a vulnerable brain.
There is some evidence that structural changes in the brains of patients with
chronic schizophrenia may correspond with suicide attempts and that white-
matter lesions in patients with Alzheimer’s disease may be associated with the
presence of suicidal thinking. Eileen Ahearn and her colleagues at Duke
University are currently studying the relationship between suicide attempts and
hyperintensities in the periventricular region of the brain, an area concerned
with, among other things, stress response and biological rhythms. These studies
are preliminary only and complicated by possible changes to the brain brought
about by psychiatric medications, but they are indicative of the direction of an
important field of suicide research.
Scientists have also been looking at the possible effects of serum lipids, such
as cholesterol and polyunsaturated essential fatty acids, on depression and
suicide. Concerned by reports that individuals who had low cholesterol levels
(either naturally or because they had made dietary changes, exercised more, or
taken cholesterol-lowering medications) were more likely to die prematurely
from suicide, investigators sought to understand the link. Not every study

showed an association between suicide and low cholesterol levels, but enough
did to warrant taking it seriously.
Several explanations were set forth. Some researchers suggested that low
cholesterol levels were simply an artifact of the real cause of suicide, namely,
depression; many people, when depressed, lose weight, and their cholesterol
levels drop accordingly. What looks causative may therefore, in fact, be
incidental. However, a few studies, which controlled for weight loss and diet,
still found a link.
Other scientists, including Jay Kaplan at the Bowman Gray School of
Medicine in North Carolina, believe that cholesterol intake affects serotonin
functioning and behavior in critical ways. In a series of intriguing studies on
macaque monkeys, he and his colleagues studied social behavior and plasma
lipids. For two years, monkeys were fed diets either high or low in saturated fat
and cholesterol. Their behavior was rated for fleeing, attacking, grooming, and
social isolation. The monkeys fed a low-fat diet exhibited more extreme physical
violence than those that were not. Other studies conducted by the same scientists
confirmed that cholesterol-lowering diets potentiate aggressive or antisocial
behavior. Low cholesterol was also linked to low serotonergic functioning in
other investigations.
Kaplan and his colleagues propose that the links among cholesterol,
aggression, and serotonin functioning may have served an important
evolutionary role: When foods high in animal fat were abundant, the resultant
relatively high serotonergic activity in the brain may have created “behavioral
complacency.” In times of food scarcity, on the other hand, especially when the
scarcity involved foods rich in animal fat, a low plasma cholesterol level may
have precipitated impulsive, risk-taking behavior such as aggressive hunting and
foraging.
The links among cholesterol, serotonergic functioning, and suicide are an
important theoretical concept, as well as one that has potentially critical clinical
implications. But the evidence so far is mixed, and much more research is
necessary before any conclusions can be reached.
Among the scientists disputing the centrality of cholesterol in depression and
suicide is Joseph Hibbeln, a researcher in the Laboratory of Membrane
Biophysics and Biochemistry at the National Institutes of Health. He strongly
believes that the important lipid players are actually the omega-3 essential fatty
acids, not cholesterol, and speculates that one reason for the increasing rates of
depression and suicide during recent decades may be due to an increase in
society’s consumption of saturated fatty acids, coupled with a decrease in the
intake of omega-3 essential fatty acids, found in fish. Low plasma concentrations

of these fatty acids, which are selectively concentrated in neural tissue, are
associated with low concentrations of CSF 5-HIAA. Societies that consume a
large amount of fish (for example, Japan and Taiwan) appear to have lower rates
of depression, though not necessarily suicide, than those that do not (for
example, Germany and New Zealand).
Paleolithic and modern hunter-gatherer populations, Hibbeln and others argue,
consumed a diet much lower in saturated fats (and higher in polyunsaturated
ones) than the modern diet. As agriculture became more specialized and focused
on raising fewer plant species, the animals that were used as the basis of our
food supply had a commensurately lower proportion of the necessary fatty acids.
Hibbeln and others estimate that during the earlier periods of human evolution
the ratio of saturated to polyunsaturated fats was perhaps one to one; in current
diets that ratio is as high as twenty-five to one. Over the past fifty years, the
widespread use of infant formula, which, unlike breast milk, contains virtually
no polyunsaturated fats, may have resulted in subtle neurological deficits that
have had an effect not only on mood and behavior but possibly on rates of
suicide as well. The results from the studies of omega-3 essential fatty acids are
preliminary, and await replication before their significance can be established.
Studies of cholesterol and essential fatty acids raise core questions about the
development of the nervous system, the possible effects of diet on depression,
aggression, and suicide, and potentially critical issues of clinical assessment and
treatment. (There may be a link between impaired fatty acid metabolism and
schizophrenia as well, as suggested by researcher David Horrobin in Scotland.)
The findings so far are by no means definitive, but by all means fascinating.
CERTAINLY, MUCH is decided by our biology. Genes, in the main, determine our
temperaments, and our temperaments in turn influence our choices about which
environments we seek out or avoid. Our temperaments also mold how we
respond to our environments and how we are shaped by them. For those who are
low-key and stable, a disappointment or rejection, the loss of a job or the end of
a marriage, or an extended bout of depression will be painful and distressing but
not life-threatening. For those with a short wick, a savage temper, and impulse-
laden wiring, life’s setbacks and illnesses are more dangerous. For them, it is as
though the nervous system had been soaked in kerosene: a fight with a lover, a
gambling loss or a run-in with the law, or an irritable flash from a mental illness
can ignite a suicidal response.
Most who encounter the ordinary, if awful, stresses and losses handed out by
life handle them well or reasonably well. In fact, very few people commit

suicide under even the most terrible and prolonged situations of physical or
mental suffering. Yet there are others who are impelled by the seemingly
slightest of reasons to reach for a gun or throw a rope across a beam. For these
more biologically vulnerable, the threshold for suicide is very low; their flash
point may be triggered by the inconsiderable. For yet others, the threshold may
be low but not dangerously so; in the presence of depression, schizophrenia,
alcoholism, or crippling anxiety, however, the threshold may drop precipitously.
A genetic predisposition to suicide by no means implies that suicide is
inevitable. It simply makes it more likely that given enough cumulative stress or
a devastating, acute one, suicide may be an option more readily summoned. In
this respect, it is no different from the “two-hit” model that characterizes many
other medical conditions. A genetic vulnerability for heart disease, cancer, or
asthma, for example, or for diabetes or sickle-cell disease, does not ensure that
the illness will occur. It does mean that it may be more readily triggered by
behavior or the environment, for example, through smoking, a sedentary
lifestyle, diet, aging, or stress. Depending on the strength of the genetic
vulnerability, the predisposing genes may or may not ever be triggered. If an
illness is overwhelmingly determined by genetic factors—for example,
Huntington’s disease—possession of the responsible gene essentially guarantees
that the disease will eventually develop. If, on the other hand, the genetics are
more complex or the underlying predisposition is less strong (or protected
against by yet other genes), the environment and an individual’s behavior has
more sway in whether or not he or she becomes ill.
For some, suicide is a sudden act. For others, it is a long-considered decision
based on cumulative despair or dire circumstance. And for many, it is both: a
brash moment of action taken during a span of settled and suicidal hopelessness.
Sudden death often waits in the wings for those whose family histories or brain
chemistries predispose them to impulsive suicide; they are like dry and brittle
pyres, unshielded against the inevitable sparks thrown off by living. If by
temperament they are impetuous and volatile, their cast to risk taking will make
them generators and throwers of sparks as well: they become instigators of
brawls; participants in and perpetuators of tumultuous affairs; gamers and
gamblers; high-wire acts; and dealers in discord. They are like the Australian
aborigines who, as Stephen Pyne describes them in his book World Fire, “on
this, the hottest and driest of the vegetated continents … habitually walked
around with flaming firebrands that dribbled embers everywhere.” They are the
ones vulnerable to impulsive suicide: those who are volatile and fractious by
nature, those who are subject to the Catherine wheel instability of mania or who
live the tossed-and-turning lives associated with personality disorders or

alcoholism.
Others kill themselves only after great deliberation and after having lived a
long time with pain, mental illness, or chronic stress. Joseph Conrad, who shot
himself in the chest when he was a young man but luckily survived, wrote,
“Suicide, I suspect, is very often the outcome of mere mental weariness—not an
act of savage energy but the final symptom of complete collapse.” For many the
cumulative despair simply becomes unendurable; there is a steady erosion in the
brake linings of the mental system that apply force against self-murder. Although
it is tempting to imagine suicide as obituary writers often do—as an
“understandable” response to a problem of life, such as economic reversal,
romantic failure, or shame—it is clear that these or similar setbacks hit everyone
at some point in their lives. Unless someone lives an unthinkably boring life, has
no hopes that can be shattered, no love that can be lost, or transits from birth to
death in a bubble above the frays of earth, he or she experiences the same griefs
or strains that, for a few, become the “cause” of death. For every grief or strain
that appears to trigger a suicide, thousands of other people have experienced
situations as bad or worse and do not kill themselves. The normal mind,
although strongly affected by a loss or damaging event, is well cloaked against
the possibility of suicide.
John Mann and his colleagues at the New York State Psychiatric Institute have
proposed a “Stress-Diathesis” model to explain the relationship between the
underlying biological predisposition to suicide and the precipitants that trigger it.
Several factors influence the predisposition to commit suicide, and together they
act to establish a threshold for suicidal behavior. These include genetic
vulnerabilities such as family history and compromised serotonergic functioning
in the brain; temperamental variables, such as aggressiveness and impulsivity;
chronic alcohol and drug abuse; chronic medical conditions; and certain social
factors, such as the early death of a parent, social isolation, or a childhood
history of physical or sexual abuse. To some extent, the threshold of suicidal
behavior can be raised (that is, suicide can, to a limited extent, be protected
against) by religious beliefs, the presence of children in the household, financial
security, strong social supports, or a good marriage. In the presence of a strong
predisposition to suicide, however, these protective factors may be of limited
value.
The precipitants of suicide, known rather oddly as “triggers,” include stressors
such as psychiatric illness, acute intoxication from drugs or alcohol, personal or
financial crisis, or contagion from another suicide. The interactions between the
threshold factors and the triggers are, of course, complicated. A man who is born
with a genetic predisposition to manic-depressive illness, has impaired

serotonergic functioning, and comes from a family with a history of suicide is at
high risk to kill himself. But his risk may increase even further if he drinks when
he is depressed or manic, because this will increase the likelihood that he will
have problems with his relationships and his work. It will also make it more
likely that his illness will get worse, that his treatment will be less effective, and
that his serotonin functioning will be compromised even further.
Alone, a single risk factor—either predisposing or precipitating—may only
slightly increase the odds that an individual will kill himself. But some, such as a
genetic or other biological predisposition, especially when coupled with a severe
psychiatric disorder, are particularly ominous. When the threshold is set low
from birth and the triggers kick in, the likelihood of suicide may become
unstoppably high. A slight affront or loss may quickly create a flash point from a
lethal mix of elements. It is as with fire: dry grass and high winds may remain, in
themselves, only dangerous possibilities, elements of combustion. But if
lightning falls across the grass, the chance of fire increases blindingly fast: it
leaps from slim to given.
ACUTE PSYCHIATRIC illness is the single most common and dangerous trigger of suicide.
Most people who suffer from depression, manic-depressive illness, alcoholism,
or schizophrenia do not kill themselves, but a vastly disproportionate number of
them do. For some, the threshold of suicide is lowered because of the
characteristics of the illness itself—for example, the extreme irritability and
impulsivity associated with mixed states or the mental and physical agitation of
severe depression as it begins to clear or as it worsens—but for others, those
who even when well have endangeringly low CSF 5-HIAA levels and who are
aggressive and reckless by temperament, mental illness may trigger the
underlying chronic propensity to commit suicide. Many things in the
environment or a person’s behavior may in turn precipitate or worsen psychiatric
illness. We saw earlier, for example, how psychological stress can play a pivotal
role in vulnerable individuals.
Sleep loss is probably the strongest element in triggering a manic episode, and
mania in turn puts the individual at a very much increased risk for depression,
mixed states, and subsequent suicide. A sharp reduction in sleep—from stress,
grief, childbirth, jet lag, work that involves sudden alterations in sleep patterns
(such as military training, shift work, war, or medical internships), acute
seasonal changes in light, alcohol or drug abuse—sets in motion powerful
biological changes in the brain. Medications such as antidepressants and steroids
can also induce profound mood changes or provoke agitated and restless states in

vulnerable individuals; so, too, can many medical conditions, such as thyroid
disorders, Cushing’s disease, myocardial infarctions, postoperative states,
hemodialysis, AIDS, head trauma, stroke, and infections. A diet that results in
low levels of cholesterol or is deficient in omega-3 essential fatty acids may also
have an impact on the suicide threshold, although the extent of its importance is
unclear. Even though, as Emil Kraepelin described nearly a hundred years ago,
“the attacks of manic-depressive insanity may be to an astonishing degree
independent of external influences,” there is no question that there is a complex
causal relationship among the major mental illnesses, behavior, and the physical
environment. These in turn exert a strong influence on the underlying biological
and temperamental vulnerabilities to suicide.
There are other major influences on suicide as well. Age is particularly
significant. Suicide, we know, is rare before the age of twelve. One percent of all
suicides occur in the first fifteen years of life, but 25 percent occur in the second.
What causes this abrupt upturn in rates?
Several researchers have suggested that very young children do not commit
suicide because they have highly unrealistic notions of death—more than half of
six- to eleven-year-olds, for example, believe that death is reversible—but it is
not obvious why such a belief would protect a child against killing himself
(indeed, it could be argued that thinking of death in such terms would make
suicide more likely). Of more relevance, perhaps, is the fact that the planning
and carrying out of suicide are cognitively quite complex, and young children
usually lack the necessary ability. Most important, major psychopathology
(mood disorders, alcohol and drug abuse, and the psychotic illnesses) is
uncommon in very young children. The severe mental illnesses are far more
likely to occur first after puberty than before.
Puberty, which generally begins between the ages of twelve and fourteen,
coincides with the first significant rise in the rate of suicide. It brings with it a
whirlpool of hormones and a steady increase in the prevalence of major
psychiatric disorders. The average age of onset for manic-depression is eighteen;
for drug and alcohol abuse and schizophrenia, twenty-one; and for major
depression, twenty-six. The rise in the prevalence of severe mental illnesses
parallels the rise in suicide, making increasing age a significant risk factor.
Gender, as well as age, plays a determining role in suicide. Some of the
differences in suicide between men and women were discussed earlier: women,
although they are more prone to depressive illness than men and are more likely
to attempt suicide, do not actually kill themselves nearly as often. To some
extent, this is because men are less likely to recognize depression in themselves
and to seek treatment for it, but it is also because they are more inclined to drink

heavily when mentally ill and to reach for firearms or other highly lethal means
in order to kill themselves. Impulsivity and violence, which predispose to
suicide, appear to be more innately characteristic of males, although the
differences between the sexes in terms of serotonergic functioning have not been
well studied.
There is some evidence that blood levels of serotonin rise during pregnancy,
which may partially account for the lower rate of suicide during this period.
(Unlike cerebrospinal fluid measures of serotonin, which measure serotonergic
functioning in the brain, blood levels of serotonin are strongly influenced by
dietary and other factors). The risk for suicide in women in the year following
childbirth is generally very low, except in those who have a history of severe
psychiatric illness. (For these women the risk of postpartum suicide is much
higher.) The evidence is somewhat conflicting for changes in the rates of suicide
during different phases of the menstrual cycle, but most studies find an increase
in suicides, suicide attempts, and calls to suicide prevention centers during the
week immediately preceding menses or during menstruation itself. A London
autopsy study of twenty-three women who had killed themselves found, from
endometrial examination, that all but one of the women was in the luteal phase
of her cycle (that is, in the fourteen days preceding menstrual bleeding).
Autopsies of Hindu women who had committed suicide by burning themselves
with kerosene revealed that nineteen of the twenty-two were menstruating at the
time of death. There is some evidence that suicide attempts during the first week
of the menstrual cycle may be associated with low levels of estrogen.
Although there is a strong male predominance in completed suicides across
the world, there are a few countries where this is not true, for example in Malta,
Egypt, Papua New Guinea, western Ethiopia, and China. In 1990, more than
180,000 Chinese women committed suicide (during the same time period,
159,000 Chinese men killed themselves), which was more than one half of the
world’s female suicides. Most of the five hundred Chinese women who kill
themselves every day are young, in their early twenties, and live in rural parts of
the country.
The explanations for such a high rate of suicide in young Chinese women are
many and controversial. Among the most logical, although by no means entirely
explanatory, is the easy access that rural Chinese women have to deadly
pesticides. An impulsive act that would be far less life-threatening if the
substance ingested were instead a medication, or if emergency medical care were
more readily available, under these circumstances becomes lethal. An impulsive
suicide attempt is quickly transformed into suicide.
Some have suggested that the rapid shift to a market economy may be

partially to blame for the high suicide rate, although this is not a situation unique
to China, nor is it clear why such a shift should affect women more adversely
than men. Others speculate that China, which does not have strong sanctions
against suicide, may make it psychologically easier for young women to make
the decision to commit suicide. Social scientists have stressed that Chinese
society places a low value on women, but while this perception of women’s low
status may be true, China is not very different in these attitudes from many other
countries that have far lower suicide rates. Family disputes, arranged marriages,
and other domestic problems are also important factors, but these or similar
stresses and conflicts exist in all societies. They may play a precipitating role,
but it is unlikely that they are the primary cause of suicide.
There is a spirited debate now under way about the extent to which mental
illness is central to suicide in China. Michael Phillips, a Canadian psychiatrist
based in Beijing, believes that only 50 percent of suicides in China are linked to
psychiatric illness, unlike in other countries, which report at least 90 percent.
Most of the others, he believes, are impulsive in nature. Andrew Cheng, a
Taiwanese doctor, whose studies conclude that more than 95 percent of suicides
in Taiwan are closely tied to mental illness—and whose findings are more
consistent with those reported elsewhere throughout the world—strongly
disagrees with Phillips. It will be some time before these differences of opinion
are sorted out, but in the meantime everyone is in agreement that something
needs to be done. Recently, Chinese doctors have begun to focus on identifying
and treating depression; access to pesticides is being curtailed; suicide
prevention programs have been started; and young girls are being taught better
ways to handle the stresses they encounter.
WE ARE, with the rest of life, periodic creatures, beholden for our rhythms to the
rotations of the earth around the sun and the moon around the earth. The
chemistry of our brains and bodies oscillates in adaptation to the earth’s
fluctuations in heat and light, and probably its electromagnetic fields as well.
Like other mammals, our patterns of eating, sleeping, and other physical
activities sway with the seasons, varying in accordance with changes in day
length and temperature. A master biological clock, genetically determined,
controls the cycling of our brain’s constituent chemicals and shapes our
responses to our physical environment.
Suicide is far from immune to the effects of the earth’s daily rhythms and
yearly seasons. Most suicides occur between 7 
A.M. and 4 
P.M., which one
nineteenth-century scientist (who had observed a similar pattern in a large

number of European countries) explained by saying, “Shocks and reverses are
most frequently met with in the busiest hours, and to those already sick of the
toils and worries of life, entrance upon a new day, no brighter than its
predecessors, is often more than they can bear.” Hospital suicides tend to be
committed very early in the day, most often between 5 A.M. and 7 A.M. Some of this
may be an artifact of activity on the wards and the availability of nursing staff,
but more likely it reflects the well-established diurnal variation that exists in
moods, particularly in those who suffer from major depression or manic-
depression. Mood, especially in individuals with manic-depression, tends to be
much worse in the morning and then improve as the day wears on. Cognitive
impairment, including attention, memory, and concentration, reaction time, and
physical strength also show profound diurnal fluxes in those with mood
disorders. These mood and cognitive changes, and their relationship to diurnal
patterns in suicidal behavior, will be discussed more fully in the context of
diurnal rhythms in the brain’s chemistry. There is no evidence for a link between
suicide and the lunar cycle although the moon may have had a more powerful
influence on moods and behavior in the time before modern lighting came into
existence. Nor is there a link between suicide and birthdays or national holidays
such as Thanksgiving and Christmas. (One study in Britain did find an increase
in suicide attempts on Saint Valentine’s Day.) There is, however, a fairly
consistent increase in suicides on Mondays. This has been attributed by some to
a “broken-promise” effect, a sense of despair or betrayal when the beginning of
the new week, which ought to be a psychological beginning, proves not to be
any different from the days preceding it. For others, if severely depressed or
disturbed, the tasks of the new week, laid out on a desk or in an appointment
book, may prove to be crushing.
The seasonal variation in suicide is one of the most robust and consistent
findings in the research literature. In the late 1800s, Enrico Morselli studied
suicide in eighteen European countries and showed that in seventeen of them the
maximum suicide rate occurred in the spring or summer months. (Conversely, in
virtually every country, the minimum occurred in the winter.) Several years ago,
I reviewed more than sixty studies of seasonal patterns in suicide and found a
similar pattern. The peak months for suicide were, with rare exceptions, in the
late spring and summer. Likewise, the lowest rates were always found in the
winter months. This late-spring-to-summer peak has also been found in a series
of Belgian, Finnish, American, and Chinese studies completed since the time of
the review. Seasonal variation in suicide appears to correlate not with the dark
and dismal months but with the brightness and extended duration of spring and
summer light instead. Consistent with this, studies carried out in the Southern

Hemisphere—in Australia, Chile, Uruguay, and South Africa—show that suicide
peaks in the months making up their springs and summers. In the Northern
Hemisphere, men have one peak in suicide—in April, May, and the summer
months—whereas women appear to share that peak but to have a second smaller
one in October and November as well.

Seasonal patterns of suicide
The peaking of suicide in the spring and summer can be demonstrated in data
collected as long ago as the fifteenth century and as recently as the last few
years. The graph on this page shows monthly patterns of suicide in several
populations: England, 1485–1715; Europe (France, Italy, Belgium), 1840–1876;
England, 1865–1884; fifteen World Health Organization countries, 1951–1959;
and the United States, 1980–1995. Across all time periods and all countries the
spring-to-summer peak and the winter trough were found.
It is clear, as well, from looking at the graph, that the seasonal effect was more
pronounced in earlier centuries—for example, in England (1485–1715) and
Europe (1840–1876)—than it has been in later ones, such as the fifteen World
Health Organization countries (1951–1959) and the United States (1980–1995).
This lessening in amplitude over time was also apparent in a major Danish study
that examined seasonal patterns in Denmark between 1835 and 1955 and in
subsequent investigations carried out in Australia and New Zealand, Canada,
Finland, Hungary, Sweden, and the United States. The explanations for this
“deseasonalization,” as Jürgen Aschoff of Germany’s Max Planck Institute has
described it, center on the idea that there has been a decrease in our biological
responsiveness to the natural environment and that this decrease has been
brought about by artificial lighting, central heating and air-conditioning,
industrialization, and urbanization. It is also possible that some of the recent
deseasonalization has taken place because antidepressant medications may be
more effective in preventing suicides that have a strong seasonal component than
those that do not.
Emile Durkheim observed last century that there was greater seasonality in
suicides in rural areas than in urban ones, a finding replicated earlier this century
in the United States and within the past few years in South Africa. Urbanization
has brought with it more distance from the rhythms of light and heat in the
natural world. Electricity, artificial lighting, interrupted sleep patterns (including
less total sleep time), and central heating all have decreased the impact of the
natural seasons on the brain and body. Yet the seasonal impact remains strong.
Why should suicide ebb and flow with the seasons? And why should suicide
occur more often in the months of sunlight, instead of during the bleak, drizzly
months of winter? We know, of course, that the daily rest-activity cycles are
deeply affected by changes in daylight and temperature. Hibernation of animals
is the most obvious example of this relatedness. Profound behavioral, endocrine,
and other physiological changes are common in response to seasonal changes in

light. In humans, variations in mood, energy, sleep, and behavior are also
strongly affected by the seasons, but they are far more pronounced in patients
with mood disorders. In fact, many neurobiological systems of relevance to
mood disorders, and presumably to suicide as well, show pronounced seasonal
patterns; these include levels of neurotransmitters, sleep and temperature
regulators, melatonin, testosterone, estrogen, thyroid, and other hormones.
During the winter, for example, which has the lowest rate of suicide, plasma L-
tryptophan (a precursor of serotonin) is at its peak, as are melatonin and thyroid
hormones and possibly cholesterol as well. All are thought to be deeply involved
in the regulation of mood, activation, or the sleep-wake cycle. The effect of
seasonal changes on serotonin and other transmitters remains unclear.
Of particular relevance in discussing seasonal patterns in suicide, however, is
the strong seasonal variability in the occurrence of the major psychiatric
disorders, depression, mania, and schizophrenia. More than two thousand years
ago, Hippocrates observed that melancholia was more likely to occur in the
spring and autumn, and other ancients noted a strong tendency for attacks of
mania to occur during the summer months. These observations have been
replicated by the more systematic work of recent scientists. Hospital admissions
for mania, it has been shown by many investigators, are far more common in the
late spring and summer. Schizophrenia, likewise, appears to be likely to occur or
recur during the summer months.
Depressive episodes show a more diverse seasonal pattern. There are
generally two broad peaks for hospital admissions for depression: during the
spring and during the autumn. Hospitalizations for depression are more likely to
reflect the severity of the depression—including suicidality—than the beginning
of the episode per se. In fact, many depressive episodes begin in winter but reach
their maximum severity or dangerousness in the early spring. Hospital admission
dates for mania, on the other hand, are more immediately tied to the actual onset
of manic episodes than they are for depressive ones because of the more quickly
emergent nature of mania.
Several things are likely to contribute to the seasonality of both the severe
mental illnesses and suicide. The biological changes brought about by alterations
in temperature and the length of daylight are likely to underlie both phenomena.
Seasonal fluctuations in the brain’s chemicals, importantly serotonin, may have a
forceful effect not only on an underlying predisposition to suicide but also on
psychopathological states such as mania, violence, depression, and psychosis.
This is also true of their effect on suicide. Violent suicides show a far stronger
seasonal pattern than do nonviolent ones; they, like homicide and other violent
behaviors, are much more likely to occur in the late spring and summer months.

A seasonal effect on factors likely to change levels of omega-3 essential fatty
acids—such as fluctuating availabilities of foods and vegetables and an
increased intake of fat-rich foods during winter solstice holidays—has been
suggested by scientist Joseph Hibbeln.
Manic and schizophrenic episodes during the summer months precipitate
highly volatile, agitated, and paranoid states that may in turn lead to impulsive
and violent acts such as suicide. Too, because most individuals who become
manic also go through a depression before or after their mania, they are at
increased risk of suicide during those times as well. Mixed states, that is,
coexisting depression and mania, are also likely to increase during this time and
are among the most deadly of psychopathological conditions. These may occur
independently, as part of the transition between depression and mania, or in the
transition between mania and normal psychological functioning. There is an
overlap in depression and mania peaks in the spring and fall that in turn
correlates with the peaks in suicide.
Depression carries with it a greatly increased risk of suicide not only during
its acute phase but also during its slow and often tempestuous period of recovery.
Suicide is not at all uncommon at the end of the worst part of the depression,
when mood seems to be improving and energy has returned. Nor is it rare during
the early stages of the descent into despair. Depression is often subtly mixed
with perturbing manic symptoms, and many patients initially diagnosed as
depressed turn out, on closer clinical evaluation, to experience mixed states as
well.
Severe depression, manic-depression, and schizophrenia may additionally act
as a “second hit” for those genetically vulnerable to suicide; that is, the pain and
agitation of psychosis, the biological events it sets into play, or the anguish and
frustration at again becoming ill may interact lethally with a susceptible
constitution. Spring and summer are deceptive notions and contain a capacity for
self-murder that winter less often has. Or, as Edward Thomas believed, winter
lingers far past its season:
But these things also are Spring’s—
On banks by the roadside the grass
Long-dead that is greyer now
Than all the Winter it was;
The shell of a little snail bleached
In the grass; chip of flint, and mite
Of chalk; and the small birds’ dung

In splashes of purest white:
All the white things a man mistakes
For earliest violets
Who seeks through Winter’s ruins
Something to pay Winter’s debts,
While the North blows, and starling flocks
By chattering on and on
Keep their spirits up in the mist,
And Spring’s here, Winter’s not gone.

THE COLOURING TO EVENTS:
THE DEATH OF MERIWETHER LEWIS
We were now about to penetrate a country at least two thousand miles
in width, on which the foot of civilized man had never trodden; the
good or evil it had in store for us was for experiment yet to determine.
… However, as the state of mind in which we are, generally gives the
colouring to events.… I could but esteem this moment of my departure
as among the most happy of my life.
—MERIWETHER LEWIS, APRIL 7, 1805
THE YOUNG red-haired Virginian had thought hard and well about the provisions his
men should take with them, but the planning cannot have been easy. A few
dozen men were about to set out on an eight-thousand-mile journey across the
unmapped American wilderness. There was little they could draw upon to
predict the quick variability of the land or to grasp its vastness. The expedition
would be far afield from usual calculation and experience, but because of this it
would in the end be unmatched for what it discovered about the country, its
inhabitants, and its resources.
The trip would be dangerous, it would be arduous, and it would take more
than two years to complete, but the expedition’s leader was anything but bowed
or intimidated. He had the confidence of the president who had chosen him, as
well as a firm, well-placed belief in his own ability to command men and to
carry out the scientific work at the heart of the expedition’s mission. He had
prepared for the trip with care and intelligence, and he was exhilarated to have
the chance to explore and chart the unknown lands.
His country had just, overnight, doubled in size. On July 4, 1803, the U.S.
Congress had purchased the Louisiana Territory from Napoleon. For three cents
an acre, the government had acquired the vast, murkily bordered lands stretching
from the Mississippi River to the Rocky Mountains. It was clear to some that it
was only a matter of time until America pushed past the western mountain
ranges and took the nation’s expanding borders to the Pacific Ocean. In the
meantime, the country needed knowing.
Captain Meriwether Lewis, the young Virginian who had drawn up the plans

for the westward expedition, was a U.S. Army officer who had lived in the
wilderness frontier and was well acquainted with Indian cultures. He was six feet
tall, restless, intrepid, and profoundly and wide-rangingly curious; he knew life
not only from the frontier but, more recently, from the inside of the president’s
house as well. Thomas Jefferson, two weeks before taking office in February
1801, had written to Lewis asking that he help with the “private concerns of the
household” and, more intriguingly, “to contribute to the mass of information
which it is interesting for the administration to acquire.” Lewis’s “knoledge of
the Western country, of the army and of all of it’s interests & relations has
rendered it desirable” that he join Jefferson as the president’s private secretary.
Meriwether Lewis accepted the position with speed and delight, and for two
years the fellow Virginians, separated in age by nearly thirty years, shared meals,
confidences, and several hours of most days together. Both men were singularly
inquisitive by nature, and both were passionate for the exploration of the
country’s vast lands—the young officer for the exploration itself, the president
for what could be learned from it. In 1802, Jefferson decided that Lewis should
command an expedition to the Pacific Ocean; he then set out for the young
officer a remarkable course of tutelage in subjects ranging from geography and
natural history to medicine, botany, and astronomy.
Jefferson had high expectations for the westward journey, and he had a
thousand questions and requests: “The object of your mission,” the president
wrote Lewis in June 1803, “is to explore the Missouri river, & such principal
stream of it, as, by it’s course & communication with the waters of the Pacific
Ocean, may offer the most direct and practicable water communication across
this continent, for the purposes of commerce.” Lewis was to “take observations
of latitude & longitude … with great pains and accuracy,” and he was to make
several copies of all notes and observations—one to be written “on the paper of
the birch, as less liable to injury from damp than common paper”—in order to
guard against damage or loss. Lewis was to determine the names of the Indian
nations, “& their numbers; the extent & limits of their possessions … their
language, traditions, monuments; their ordinary occupations in agriculture,
fishing, hunting, war, arts … the diseases prevalent among them, & the remedies
they use … peculiarities in their laws, customs and dispositions.”
Lewis and his men were also to record the “soil and face of the country, it’s
growth & vegetable productions … the animals of the country generally … the
mineral productions of every kind … Volcanic appearances.” Climate was to be
carefully noted “by the proportion of rainy, cloudy & clear days, by lightening,
hail, snow, ice, by the access & recess of frost, by the winds prevailing at
different seasons, the dates at which particular plants put forth or lose their

flowers, or leaf, times of appearance of particular birds, reptiles or insects.”
Jefferson’s instructions to Lewis could not have been written by anyone else.
As Donald Jackson, the editor of the correspondence and documents of the
Lewis and Clark expedition, has put it: “They embrace years of study and
wonder, the collected wisdom of his government colleagues and Philadelphia
friends; they barely conceal his excitement at realizing that at last he would have
facts, not vague guesses, about the Stony Mountains, the river courses, the wild
Indian tribes, the flora and fauna of untrodden places.”
The president had no doubt that if anyone could be trusted to carry out his
requests, it would be Meriwether Lewis. “Capt. Lewis is brave, prudent,
habituated to the woods, & familiar with Indian manners & character,” Jefferson
wrote to Benjamin Rush, the eminent Philadelphia physician from whom Lewis
was to learn medicine in order to look after his men on the expedition. “He is not
regularly educated, but he possesses a great mass of accurate observation on all
the subjects of nature which present themselves here, & will therefore readily
select those only in his new route which shall be new.” After Lewis died,
Jefferson elaborated further upon his friend’s temperament and character: “No
season or circumstance could obstruct his purpose,” Jefferson wrote. He
possessed a passion for “dazzling pursuits”; had “enterprise, boldness, and
discretion,” “courage undaunted,” and a “firmness and perseverance of purpose
which no thing but impossibilities could divert from its direction.” His fidelity to
truth was “scrupulous.”
In the final paragraph of the president’s extraordinary and detailed instructions
to Lewis, Jefferson requested that he designate a second in command who could
take over Lewis’s responsibilities should he die on the expedition. Lewis decided
to appoint a co-leader instead and chose for the position William Clark, an
officer he greatly admired and liked and under whom he had previously served.
By the late summer of 1803 the expedition was under way. The leaders and
their men set out with fishing hooks and tents; mosquito netting, whiskey, and
salt pork; Pennsylvania rifles and axes; sextants and telescopes; lamps and
kettles and saws. They left with provisions for most imaginable contingencies,
and they took, as well, items of exchange for the Indians they would encounter:
boxes of fabrics and bright things—500 brooches, 72 rings, 12 dozen looking
glasses, 3 pounds of beads—tomahawks and knives; striped silk ribbons and
calico shirts; and 130 rolls of tobacco. There were, for the inevitable fevers and
injuries along the way, tourniquets, lancets, and medicinal teas. Laudanum, an
ease for almost any ailment, was boxed up as well, as were cloves and nutmegs
to disguise the acrid taste of improvised brews and tonics. Peruvian bark,
containing quinine, was included to fight malaria.

With what they had and knew, the men could cross rivers and plains, build
boats, and survive in the mountains. They could barter for goods, and they could
defend themselves. But two of the men, Lewis and Clark, could also measure,
describe, and write down what they had observed and where their journey had
taken them. They had provisions for history—100 quills, 1 pound of sealing
wax, 6 papers of ink powder, and 6 brass inkstands—and with their quills and
ink they filled red morocco-bound journals and an elk-skin field book with
precise and captivating scientific records of their twenty-eight-month journey
across the American continent.
The Corps of Discovery—Lewis and Clark and their small contingent of
soldiers, hunters, woodsmen, blacksmith, cook, and carpenters—went into the
country’s unmapped territories and mapped them; explored its rivers and
mountains; dug canoes out of cottonwood trees; did commerce with the Indians;
and at times stayed among them. They caught fish and shot game. They walked
forever, took the measure of the lands and rivers they crossed, and then, after
extracting from the stars what they needed for their bearings, the leaders of the
expedition would start to write. They filled their journals with detailed
descriptions of the plants and trees they had discovered, new animals
encountered, the flowings of waters and the structure of the mountains, and the
medicines or the discipline they had doled out to their men.
The journals of Lewis and Clark are vivid and immediate; they pull the reader
into the unexplored continent and wildlife of wilderness America. Here, for
example, is Lewis writing about weather, the taste of a beaver tail, and the gait of
porcupines. It is May 1805, and the expedition is making its way upstream on
the Missouri River:
Thursday May 2nd, 1805.
The wind continued violent all night nor did it abate much of it’s
violence this morning, when at daylight it was attended with snow
which continued to fall untill about 10 A.M. being about one inch deep, it
formed a singular contrast with the vegitation which was considerably
advanced. some flowers had put forth in the plains, and the leaves of
the cottonwood were as large as a dollar. sent out some hunters who
killed 2 deer 3 Elk and several buffaloe; on our way this evening we
also shot three beaver along the shore; these anamals in consequence
of not being hunted are extreemly gentle, where they are hunted they
never leave their lodges in the day, the flesh of the beaver is esteemed
a delecacy among us; I think the tale a most delicious morsal, when
boiled it resembles in flavor the fresh tongues and sounds of the

codfish, and is usually sufficiently large to afford a plentifull meal for
two men.
Friday, May 3rd, 1805
We saw vast quantities of Buffaloe, Elk, deer principally of the long
tale kind, Antelope or goats, beaver, geese, ducks, brant and some
swan. near the entrance of the river mentioned in the 10th. course of
this day, we saw an unusual number of Porcupines from which we
determined to call the river after that anamal, and accordingly
denominated it Porcupine river. …
I walked out a little distance and met with 2 porcupines which were
feeding on the young willow which grow in great abundance on all the
sandbars; this anamal is exceedingly clumsy and not very watchfull I
approached so near one of them before it percieved me that I touched
it with my espontoon.—found the nest of a wild goose among some
driftwood in the river from which we took three eggs. this is the only
nest we have met with on driftwood, the usual position is the top of a
broken tree, sometimes in the forks of a large tree but almost
invariably, from 15 to 20 feet or upwards high.—
Neither Lewis nor Clark was a professional naturalist or geographer, but they
were fastidious in their measurements and descriptions of the places they had
been and the wildlife they had seen. Along the way, they sent back to Jefferson
and scientists in Philadelphia the moon rocks of their time: nearly two hundred
different specimens of trees and plants—grasses from the plains, currants,
wildflowers, sagebrush, flax, Mariposa lilies, spruce, and maples—most of
which had been, until that time, unknown to leading botanists. They shipped
crates full of roots, seeds, and bulbs, as well as the skins and skeletons of
weasels, coyotes, squirrels, badgers, birds, antelopes, mountain rams, and scores
of other animals. “Few explorers have undertaken a larger task or achieved
greater success in carrying it out,” observed one writer. “Their survey notes were
meticulously recorded, and their maps of the areas explored were the best
available for fifty years.”
In September 1806 the Corps of Discovery completed its journey. Jefferson’s
initial hope of finding a Northwest Passage that linked the Atlantic with the
Pacific was not realized, but the exploration was otherwise a success beyond the
imaginations of imaginative men. When Lewis and Clark and the rest of their
expedition arrived in St. Louis, they stepped from their boat into a swirl of

acclaim, society balls, and national celebration. “Never,” declared Thomas
Jefferson, “did a similar event excite more joy in the United States.” Meriwether
Lewis, however, only thirty-two years old, began the descent into the last three,
deeply unsettled years of his life.
It is nearly two hundred years since Meriwether Lewis died of gunshot wounds
in a cabin seventy miles from Nashville. The circumstances of his death remain
charged with controversy and rancor, although suicide seems by far to be the
most likely explanation for his death. But suicide is at odds with a country’s
notion of what a hero should be. Thomas Jefferson, who for two years had lived
intimately with Lewis and who had treated him like a son; William Clark, who
had shared leadership, adversity, and triumphs with him for at least as long; and
those who were with Lewis during the last hours and days of his life had no
doubt that his wounds were self-inflicted. Yet the possibility that Lewis might
have killed himself proved unthinkable to many who had never even met him.
Derangement, as several who observed his mental state toward the end of his life
described it, seemed, for some, inconsistent with courage, honor, and
accomplishment of the first rank. Conspiracy theories and speculation about
murder cropped up to “protect” the blackened reputation of the explorer. But
what was the evidence of suicide? Who could imagine that Lewis’s reputation
needed defending? And why should suicide be seen as a dishonorable rather than
just dreadfully tragic act?
Contemporary accounts of the weeks leading up to Lewis’s death make a
compelling case for a deeply distraught and troubled man who was drinking
heavily, spending and investing money irrationally, and acting in a way that
caused others to be concerned for his safety and well-being. His position as
governor of the Louisiana Territories, taken up after his return from the West,
was marred by conflict and questionable judgment, and he was hopelessly
behind in preparing the journals of the expedition. Jefferson was clearly
exasperated: “I am very often applied to know when our work will appear,” he
wrote to Lewis. “I have so long promised copies to my literary correspondents in
France that I am almost bankrupt in their eyes. I shall be very happy to receive
from yourself information of your expectations on this subject.” The inordinate
delay in forwarding the highly awaited information about the journey was not
the first time there had been gaps in Lewis’s writing. Most of them, interestingly,
showed a similar seasonal pattern, occurring during August and/or September;
some extended through late fall or early winter, as well (Lewis died in early
October 1809). In that same time of the year, in August 1805, Lewis also wrote

the only introspective and rather melancholic entry into his journal:
This day I completed my thirty first year, and conceived that I had in
all human probability now existed about half the period which I am to
remain in this Sublunary world. I reflected that I had as yet done but
little, very little indeed, to further the hapiness of the human race, or to
advance the information of the succeeding generation. I viewed with
regret the many hours I have spent in indolence, and now soarly feel
the want of that information which those hours would have given me
had they been judiciously expended. but since they are past and cannot
be recalled, I dash from me the gloomy thought, and resolved in future,
to redouble my exertions and at least indeavour to promote those two
primary objects of human existence, by giving them the aid of that
portion of talents which nature and fortune have bestoed on me; or in
future, to live for mankind, as I have heretofore lived for myself.
In early September 1809, the month before he died, Lewis set off for
Washington and Philadelphia to straighten out his financial affairs and to work
on the publication of his expedition journals. William Clark, who had tried to
help Lewis sort out his expense accounts, was clearly concerned about the state
of Lewis’s mind: “Several of his Bills [to the government] have been protested,
and his Crediters all flocking in near the time of his Setting out distressed him
much, which he expressed to me in Such terms as to Cause a Cempothy which is
not yet off—I do not believe there was ever a honester man in Louisiana nor one
who had pureor motives than Govr. Lewis. if his mind had been at ease I Should
have parted Cherefuly.”
A week after leaving St. Louis, Lewis drew up a will, and a few days later he
arrived at Fort Pickering (Memphis). The commanding officer of the fort,
Captain Gilbert Russell, heard from the crew on Lewis’s boat that Lewis had
twice attempted to kill himself. Russell himself observed that Lewis had been
drinking heavily and was, at the time he arrived at the fort, “mentally deranged.”
The commander, afraid that Lewis would take his own life, unloaded Lewis’s
boat so that he could not escape and kept him under constant surveillance for
several days:
In this condition he continued without any material change for about
five days, during which time the most proper and efficatious means
that could be devised to restore him was administered, and on the sixth
or seventh day all symptoms of derangement disappeared and he was

completely in his senses and thus continued for ten or twelve days.…
In three or four days he was again affected with the same mental
disease. He had no person with him who could manage or controul
him in his propensities and he daily grew worse untill he arrived at the
house of a Mr. Grinder … where in the apprehension of being
destroyed by enemies which had no existence but in his wild
imagination, he destroyed himself in the most cool desperate and
Barbarian-like manner, having been left in the house intirely to
himself.
The U.S. agent to the Chickasaw Nation, James Neelly, who was with Lewis
for the last three weeks of his life, wrote to President Jefferson shortly after
Lewis’s death: “It is with extreme pain I have to inform you of the death of His
Excellency Meriwether Lewis, Governor of Upper Louisiana who died on the
morning of the 11th instant and I am Sorry to Say by Suicide.” He reported, as
Russell had, that Lewis had been mentally “deranged” off and on for some
period of time.
The details of Lewis’s suicide were later recorded in detail by his friend, the
eminent ornithologist Alexander Wilson. He wrote his account after interviewing
the woman at whose inn Lewis had died:
Governor Lewis, she said, came hither about sunset, alone, and
inquired if he could stay for the night; and alighting, brought his
saddle into the house. He was dressed in a loose gown, white, striped
with blue. On being asked if he came alone, he replied that there were
two servants behind, who would soon be up. He called for some
spirits, and drank a very little. When the servants arrived … he
inquired for his powder.… [He] walked backwards and forwards
before the door, talking to himself.
Sometimes, she said, he would seem as if he were walking up to
her; and would suddenly wheel round, and walk back as fast as he
could. Supper being ready he sat down, but had eaten only a few
mouthfuls when he started up, speaking to himself in a violent manner.
… He smoked for some time, but quitted his seat and traversed the
yard as before. He again sat down to his pipe, seemed again composed,
and casting his eyes wistfully towards the west, observed what a sweet
evening it was. Mrs. Grinder was preparing a bed for him, but he said
he would sleep on the floor, and desired the servant to bring the bear
skins and buffalo robe, which were immediately spread out for him;

and, it now being dusk, the woman went off to the kitchen and the two
men to the barn which stands about two hundred yards off.
The kitchen is only a few paces from the room where Lewis was,
and the woman being considerably alarmed by the behavior of her
guest could not sleep, but listened to him walking backwards and
forwards, she thinks, for several hours, and talking aloud, as she said,
“like a lawyer.” She then heard the report of a pistol, and something
fall heavily to the floor, and the words “O Lord!” Immediately
afterwards she heard another pistol, and in a few minutes she heard
him at her door calling out, “O madam! give me some water and heal
my wounds!”
The logs being open, and unplastered, she saw him stagger back and
fall against a stump that stands between the kitchen and the room. He
crawled for some distance, and raised himself by the side of a tree,
where he sat about a minute. He once more got to the room; afterwards
he came to the kitchen door, but did not speak; she then heard him
scraping in the bucket with a gourd for water; but it appears that this
cooling element was denied the dying man.
As soon as the day broke, and not before, the terror of the woman
having permitted him to remain for two hours in this most deplorable
situation, she sent two of her children to the barn, her husband not
being home, to bring the servants; and on going in they found him
lying on the bed. He uncovered his side, and showed them where the
bullet had entered; a piece of his forehead was blown off, and had
exposed the brains, without having bled much.
He begged they would take his rifle and blow out his brains, and he
would give them all the money in his trunk. He often said, “I am no
coward; but I am so strong, so hard to die.” He begged the servant not
to be afraid of him, for that he would not hurt him. He expired in about
two hours, or just as the sun rose above the trees.
Captain Russell’s account of Lewis’s last hours was even more dreadful. After
twice shooting himself with his pistol, Russell reports, Lewis “got his razors
from a port folio which happened to contain them and siting up in his bed was
found about day light, by one of the servants, busily engaged in cuting himself
from head to foot.”
William Clark was stricken at the news of his friend’s death, but he was not
entirely surprised by the accounts that Lewis had killed himself: “I fear O! I fear

the weight of his mind has overcome him,” he wrote to his brother two weeks
after Lewis died. And Thomas Jefferson, in a short memoir about Meriwether
Lewis, wrote:
Governor Lewis had, from early life, been subject to hypochondriac
[depressive] affections. It was a constitutional disposition in all the
nearer branches of the family of his name, and was more immediately
inherited by him from his father. They had not, however, been so
strong as to give uneasiness to his family. While he lived with me in
Washington I observed at times sensible depressions of mind: but
knowing their constitutional source, I estimated their course by what I
had seen in the family. During his western expedition, the constant
exertion which that required of all the faculties of body and mind,
suspended these distressing affections; but after his establishment at
St. Louis in sedentary occupations, they returned upon him with
redoubled vigour, and began seriously to alarm his friends. He was in a
paroxysm of one of these, when his affairs rendered it necessary for
him to go to Washington.…
About three o’clock in the night he did the deed which plunged his
friends into affliction, and deprived his country of one of her most
valued citizens.… It lost too to the nation the benefit of receiving from
his own hand the narrative … of his sufferings and successes, in
endeavoring to extend for them the boundaries of science, and to
present to their knowledge that vast and fertile country, which their
sons are destined to fill with arts, with science, with freedom and
happiness.
Jefferson’s account of his friend’s death would seem to many, myself
included, a thoughtful and compassionate portrayal of the death of a courageous
man. But others have felt differently. Some simply cannot reconcile the outward
realities of Lewis’s life with his desire to leave it. Olin Dunbar Wheeler,
historian and editor, was one of these. “It seems impossible,” he wrote, “that a
young man of 35, the Governor of the vast Territory of Louisiana, then on his
way from his capital to that of the nation, where he knew he would be received
with all the distinction and consideration due his office and reputation, should
take his own life.” Biographer Flora Seymour, writing in 1937, thought suicide
totally out of character: “Many believed that Governor Lewis, ill, dejected,
despairing of justice, had died by his own hand.… But those who had been with
the brave young captain on the long journey West felt that this could not be the

solution. The Meriwether Lewis they knew did not lose his courage nor his head
in times of trial.”
A more recent biographer, Richard Dillon, takes Seymour’s argument further,
determined to clear Lewis’s name of the “crime” of suicide:
Is it likely that the cause of Lewis’s death was self-murder? Not at
all. If there is such a person as the antisuicide type, it was Meriwether
Lewis. By temperament, he was a fighter, not a quitter.… Sensitive he
was; neurotic he was not. Lewis was one of the most positive
personalities in American history.
Not enough has been made of the factors weighing against his
taking his own life. His courage; his enthusiasm; his youth (thirty-
five); his plans—to return to St. Louis, after seeing his mother and
setting things straight in Washington; to engage in the fur trade with
his brother, Reuben, and his best friend, Will Clark.…
In a democracy such as ours—to which Meriwether Lewis was so
strongly dedicated—it is held in the courts of justice that a man is
presumed innocent of a crime until proved guilty. Meriwether Lewis
has not been proven guilty of self-destruction at Grinder’s Stand in the
early hours of October 11, 1809. Therefore let him be found NOT GUILTY of
the charge—the crime of suicide.
Yet others have stated that Lewis’s death was somehow “beclouded” or
“tainted by dishonor”; some, believing that Lewis was murdered, have impugned
Jefferson’s integrity for concluding that Lewis’s death was self-inflicted: “It
seems to me that Jefferson’s ready acceptance of Lewis’s death by suicide was a
disgraceful way to treat a man,” wrote physician and historian E. G. Chuinard a
few years ago. David Leon Chandler, a Pulitzer Prize–winning journalist, put
Jefferson in the center of a convoluted conspiracy (the title of his book is The
Jefferson Conspiracies: A President’s Role in the Assassination of Meriwether
Lewis) and states, among other things, that “Thomas Jefferson’s complicity is a
substantial one and includes his endorsement of the suicide theory.… He
accepted the stigma of suicide because he feared a greater scandal.” Less darkly,
William Clark’s son, Meriwether Lewis Clark, said simply that he wished no
stigma “upon the fair name I have the honor to bear.”
Underlying the suicide-murder controversy run several streams of thought: it
is a disgrace to die by suicide; that Lewis was too young or too successful to kill
himself (neither of which, of course, protects against suicide); or that committing

suicide is intrinsically a cowardly act and therefore a great and courageous man
could not have done such a thing. Others have argued that Jefferson would not
have appointed Lewis to command the westward expedition had he actually
known of any mental instability in Lewis or his family line. This argument has
been further buttressed by repeated assertions that, in any event, Jefferson could
have had no way of knowing of any mental illness in Lewis’s family, despite the
fact that Jefferson and Lewis had lived together for two years and presumably
had had many intimate discussions which neither of them committed to paper.
There is, in fact, no way of knowing what confidences about family and self they
shared. It is difficult, short of weaving an elaborate conspiracy net, to imagine
why Jefferson would write what he did about Lewis and his father’s family
unless he believed it to be true. (Interestingly, there may have been instability on
both sides of the family. Lewis’s half brother, Dr. John Marks, his mother’s son
by her second marriage, at one point had to be confined because of “mental
problems”; there was also a great deal of intermarriage, nearly a dozen
marriages, between the Meriwether and Lewis families.)
Jefferson’s conjecture that Lewis’s melancholic tendencies were put on ice as
long as he was actively and physically engaged but emerged later during slower,
more sedentary times is perceptive, telling, and completely consistent with what
is known about restless, energetic, and impetuous temperaments that have an
obverse inclination to despair. Stephen Ambrose, in his excellent biography of
Meriwether Lewis, Undaunted Courage, discusses at some length Meriwether
Lewis’s occasional quickness of temper: “He had, however, four times lost his
temper and twice threatened to kill. His behavior was erratic and threatening to
the future of the expedition.… He had a short temper and too often acted on it.…
[He] could not keep his ‘boisterous’ passion in check.”
Lewis, then, had a family and personal history of depression, a quick temper
and a restless disposition, and a tendency to drink heavily and, toward the end of
his life, to be financially reckless and rather unaccountable in his professional
obligations. He twice attempted suicide and was placed on a close suicide watch
by a fellow officer. His closest friends, William Clark and Thomas Jefferson,
believed the eyewitness accounts of his last days and hours, all of which had
concluded that he had killed himself.
Why, then, the convoluted theories of conspiracy, of malaria, or of syphilis, all
of which have been offered as “explanations” for his death? There is little
credible evidence for the “Jefferson conspiracy”; improbable speculation only
for the theory of murder (much of it based on the magnification of inevitable
inconsistencies in the accounts of witnesses); and next to no evidence at all for
syphilis, although it is possible he had it. He may well have suffered from

malaria, which was endemic along the frontier; this has been suggested by some
as the explanation for his “derangement.” Cerebral malaria, which occasionally
results in impulsive and self-destructive acts, is very uncommon. (Of the malaria
cases reported in the nineteenth century, as well as the tens of thousands detailed
in World Wars I and II and the Vietnam War, fewer than 2 percent were cerebral
malaria; of those that were, suicide was a rare outcome.) A medical cause for
irrational behavior may be more palatable to some historians, but it is not more
plausible.
Douglass Adair and Dawson Phelps of the Oregon Historical Society raise, I
think, the critical question: “Apparently,” they write, “most of Lewis’s
contemporaries who knew him well … were either not surprised to learn that he
had killed himself, or had extremely persuasive evidence that his death was
suicide. Does the murder theory reflect the unwillingness of American scholars
(the frontier specialists in particular) to admit that a man as great as Lewis had
shown himself to be … could become so spiritually desolated or mentally ill that
he could kill himself?”
I think the answer is yes, that scholars and laypeople alike find it hard to hold
in their minds the thought that a great man could have been deranged or that a
courageous man could have killed himself. But such men do. And the same bold,
restless temperament that Jefferson saw in the young Meriwether Lewis can lie
uneasily just this side of a restless, deadly despair. It is to the great credit of
Jefferson that he was able to understand this complexity of human nature and to
Lewis’s credit that he chose as his co-leader and explorer William Clark, a man
of a complementary, more even disposition.
In recent years, there has been a rumbling to disinter the remains of
Meriwether Lewis. It is argued that doing so would settle the truth of his death
once and for all, and perhaps it would. One reader of the Washington Post, for
example wrote, that if it could be proved that Meriwether Lewis had been
murdered, “then a blot is removed from the name of the explorer.” I wrote a
letter to the Post in response. I thought it was extraordinary that suicide should
be seen as a “blot”; that there was a compelling case that Lewis had suffered
from manic-depression and had killed himself; and that however Lewis had died,
he had lived a life of remarkable courage, accomplishment, and vision. Suicide
is not a blot on anyone’s name; it is a tragedy. I believe, as do many others, that
he should be allowed to keep such undisinterred peace as he might have. He has
earned his rest. And, in the end, for all of us, it is his life that remains. Lewis
was, as Ambrose writes, an explorer first, last, and always:
He was a man of high energy and was at times impetuous, but this was

tempered by his great self-discipline. He could drive himself to the
point of exhaustion, then take an hour to write about the events of the
day, and another to make his celestial observations.
His talents and skills ran wider than they did deep. He knew how to
do many things, from designing and building a boat to all the
necessary wilderness skills. He knew a little about many of the various
parts of the natural sciences. He could describe an animal, classify a
plant, name the stars, manage the sextant and other instruments, dream
of empire. But at none of these things was he an expert, or uniquely
gifted.
Where he was unique, truly gifted, and truly great was as an
explorer, where all his talents were necessary. The most important was
his ability as a leader of men. He was born to leadership, and reared
for it, studied it in his army career, then exercised it on the expedition.
• • •
MERIWETHER LEWIS was a great man and the circumstances of his death unbearably sad.
Shakespeare, in writing of the suicide of Mark Antony, said it best: “The
breaking of so great a thing should make / A greater crack: the round world /
Should have shook lions into civil streets, / And citizens to their dens.”

IV
Building Against Death
—PREVENTION OF SUICIDE—
But suicides have a special language
Like carpenters they want to know which tools.
They never ask why build.
—ANNE SEXTON
Anne Sexton (1928–1974) received the 1967 Pulitzer Prize for Live or Die,
a collection of poems that included the one excerpted here. She attempted
suicide on several occasions, and eventually died in 1974 from carbon
monoxide poisoning. Her sister and aunt also committed suicide.

CHAPTER 8
Modest Magical Qualities
—TREATMENT AND PREVENTION—
For melancholy, take a ram’s head that never meddled with a ewe …
boil it well, skin and wool together … take out the brains, and put
these spices to it, cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg, cloves.…
It may be eaten with bread in an egg or broth.
—ROBERT BURTON
Lithium … is the lightest of the solid elements and it is perhaps not
surprising that it should in consequence possess certain modest
magical qualities.
—G. P. HARTIGAN
MARIGOLD IS “much approved against melancholy,” wrote Robert Burton in 1621;
so too are dandelion, ash, willow, tamarisk, roses, violets, sweet apples, wine,
tobacco, syrup of poppy, featherfew, and sassafras. A ring made of the hoof of an
ass’s right forefoot is “not altogether to be rejected,” and “St. John’s wort,
gathered on a Friday in the hour of Jupiter … mightily helps.”
The treatment of melancholy and the prevention of suicide have moved on
since tamarisk and featherfew, but still it is from the natural world—a light
metal, the third element in the periodic table—that we have extracted lithium,
our most demonstrably effective treatment against suicide. We have, as well,
found other medications that stabilize mood, fight psychosis, or tamp down
anxiety, agitation, and impulsivity. We have antidepressant medications that
aggressively treat the depressions often responsible for suicide. We have built
hospitals to provide a sanctuary against madness and self-inflicted death, and
developed psychotherapies to ameliorate pain and to help the suicidal navigate
through the darkest times of their lives. We know a great deal about how to
prevent suicide, but not enough. And what we do know, we do not use as well or

widely as we could.
The causes of suicide lie, for the most part, in an individual’s predisposing
temperament and genetic vulnerabilities; in severe psychiatric illness; and in
acute psychological stress. Addressing only one of these causes at the expense of
others is unlikely to be enough to keep suicide at bay. Misdiagnosing or ineptly
treating a potentially lethal psychiatric illness, or underplaying the gravity of a
suicide risk, can and often does have tragic consequences. Together, doctors,
patients, and their family members can minimize the chances of suicide, but it is
a difficult, subtle, and frustrating venture. Its value is obvious, but the ways of
achieving it are not. Anyone who suggests that coming back from suicidal
despair is a straightforward journey has never taken it.
Most who commit suicide explicitly, and often repeatedly, communicate their
intentions to kill themselves to others—to their doctors, family, or friends—
before doing so. Many never do: they act on impulse or cloak their plans; they
give no chance to themselves or others. But for those who do make clear their
desire to die, it is fortunate; it allows at least the possibility of treatment and
prevention. Eli Robins and his colleagues at the Washington University School
of Medicine in St. Louis concluded in their landmark study of 134 suicides:
If we had found that suicide was an impulsive, unpremeditated act
without rather well defined clinical limits, then the problems of its
prevention would present insurmountable difficulties using presently
available clinical criteria. The high rate of communication of suicidal
ideas indicates that in the majority of instances it is a premeditated act
of which the person gives ample warning.
In a clinical setting, assessment of suicide risk must precede any attempt to
treat psychiatric illness or prevent suicide. Asking a patient directly about
suicidal thoughts or plans is an obvious and essential part of history taking. In
addition to an individual’s stated plans about suicide, there are other major risk
factors that need to be evaluated: the presence or absence of severe anxiety,
agitation, 
or 
perturbance; 
the 
pervasiveness, 
type, 
and 
severity 
of
psychopathology; the extent of hopelessness; the presence or absence of a severe
sleep disturbance or of mixed states; current alcohol or drug abuse; ease of
access to a lethal means, especially firearms; lack of access to good medical and
psychological treatment; recent severe causes of stress, such as a divorce, job
loss, or death in the family; a family history of suicidal or violent behavior;
social isolation, or a lack of friends and family; close proximity to a first episode
of depression, mania, or schizophrenia; and recent release from a psychiatric

hospital.
It is difficult but essential to obtain from a potentially suicidal patient an
accurate and comprehensive history of violence and impulsivity, because, in
conjunction with psychiatric illness, they can create a flash point for suicide.
Many patients, especially women, are reluctant to acknowledge such behaviors;
others, for whom violent feelings and relationships are an integral part of their
lives, may not realize that their violent behaviors are sufficiently unusual to
report them to a doctor or therapist. Patients need to be asked whether or not
they have a quick or violent temper; how frequently they find themselves in the
middle of tempestuous relationships or participants in repeated scenes of vitriolic
verbal abuse; and whether or not they experience frequent and pronounced
irritability or engage in impulsive behaviors, such as bolting from social
situations or attempting to jump out of moving cars.
Treatment decisions follow from the clinical evaluation of suicide risk and
psychiatric diagnosis. A clinician’s first responsibility is to evaluate the risk of
imminent suicide and, if necessary, to arrange for hospitalization. Such an
assessment is occasionally straightforward, but often it is not. Acutely suicidal
patients who are at high risk often need to be hospitalized, both as a protective
measure and in order to diagnose and treat severe mental illness, and to evaluate
the patient’s psychological assets and social resources.
Psychiatric hospitalization is generally both frightening and reassuring to
suicidal patients. It continues to carry a heavy stigma and to create personal,
economic, and professional difficulties for many individuals. And as we have
seen, it does not prevent all suicides. Hospitals do, however, save many lives,
and they relieve not only patients, but also their family members and friends, of
the terrible burden of feeling responsible for their own or another’s life.
Hospitalization is too often seen by both patients and their doctors as a symbolic
defeat or as the treatment of last resort, rather than as an occasional necessity for
a serious problem. These beliefs, which tend not to accompany decisions to
hospitalize people who have other medical conditions, are pervasive and
dangerous, and they stand in the way of good clinical care.
William Styron, who described his hospitalization for suicidal depression as a
“way station, a purgatory,” strongly regretted his doctor’s reluctance to admit
him to a psychiatric ward:
Many psychiatrists, who simply do not seem to be able to comprehend
the nature and depth of the anguish their patients are undergoing,
maintain their stubborn allegiance to pharmaceuticals in the belief that
eventually the pills will kick in, the patient will respond, and the

somber surroundings of the hospital will be avoided.… I’m convinced
I should have been in the hospital weeks before. For, in fact, the
hospital was my salvation, and it is something of a paradox that in this
austere place with its locked and wired doors and desolate green
hallways—ambulances screeching night and day ten floors below—I
found the repose, the assuagement of the tempest in my brain, that I
was unable to find in my quiet farmhouse.
Whether or not acutely suicidal individuals are hospitalized, they need
intensive care: a greater time and emotional commitment from their clinicians;
specialized and aggressive use of medications; intensified psychotherapeutic or
other clinical contacts; and an increased involvement between their doctors and
their family members and friends. Later, we will deal in some detail with
psychotherapy and with family education and involvement. Here we delve into
what is known about the effectiveness of different kinds of medication in
preventing suicide.
Suicide usually requires multiple “hits”—a biological predisposition, a major
psychiatric illness, and an acute life stress—but only some of these “hits” are
amenable to change. There is, for example, relatively little a doctor can do to
control many of the major stresses in a patient’s life: they occur too randomly,
and thus are difficult to predict and even more difficult to govern. But there are
things that can be done to influence or treat the underlying biological
vulnerabilities to suicide, as well as the mental illnesses closely linked to
suicidal behavior.
Lithium is the most effective, most extensively studied, and best-documented
antisuicide medication now available. It has been used since 1949 to stabilize the
dangerous mood swings and erratic behavior associated with manic-depressive
illness and, by Europeans particularly, to prevent recurrent depressions. Its
effectiveness in preventing suicide is probably due to its impact on two of the
most potent risk factors for suicide: its putative capacity to enhance serotonin
turnover in the brain (as well as its effects on other neurotransmitters)—and
thereby to decrease aggression, agitation, and impulsivity—and its power to
decrease or eliminate mania and depression in most people who have manic-
depressive illness.
Recently, two researchers from Harvard Medical School, Leonardo Tondo and
Ross Baldessarini, and I reviewed twenty-eight published treatment studies that
together included more than seventeen thousand patients with major depression
or manic-depressive illness. Patients who had not been treated with lithium were
nearly nine times more likely to commit or attempt suicide than those who had

been treated with it. (In a separate investigation, Tondo and his colleagues found
that suicidal acts rose sixteenfold in the first year after discontinuing lithium
treatment.) A 1999 study from Sweden concluded that lithium treatment resulted
in a 77 percent reduction in the risk of suicide. The authors, while cautioning
that patients who remain on lithium for several years make up a self-selected
population, noted that patients were nearly five times more likely to kill
themselves when they were not taking lithium than when they were.
If lithium works so well to prevent recurrences of mania and depression, and
if it has such a potent effect in decreasing suicidal behaviors, why isn’t everyone
who suffers from a major mood disorder taking lithium? Indeed, why isn’t
everyone who is suicidal taking lithium? The answers reflect the problems, as
well as the promise, of psychiatric medications. First, not everyone responds
well to lithium. Some who take it respond only partially or, more unusually, not
at all. Others cannot take it for medical reasons, or they find the side effects
intolerable. Many others, as we shall see later, are simply noncompliant; that is,
they do not take the medication as prescribed. For whatever reasons, lithium is
seen by many patients as a stigmatizing treatment, or else it is seen as toxic, an
attitude not helped by the attitudes and practices of many in the medical
community. The difficulty was captured in a letter written to the editors of The
Lancet: “Psychiatrists and other practitioners regard the use of lithium as arcane,
difficult, and potentially dangerous for all but the specialist to administer,” wrote
the concerned practitioners, who also noted that there was “poor quality and
reliability of lithium information from official sources” and that the plasma
lithium concentrations recommended by many doctors were often far too high,
reflecting clinical practice that was fifteen to twenty years out of date. These
attitudes are subtly pervasive in clinical practice, especially in the United States,
and are the result of many factors: lithium requires monitoring of blood levels to
prevent toxicity, and side effects—such as blunting of emotions, slowed
thinking, and problems in coordination—affect a number of patients.
Some of the marginalization of lithium is due to other important advances in
medical research. Many new medications used for treating mood disorders—the
anticonvulsant drugs (which were first used to treat epilepsy, but now are used to
treat manic-depression, as well) and the newer antidepressants, for example, the
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, such as citalopram, fluvoxamine,
paroxetine, fluoxetine, and sertraline (Celexa, Luvox, Paxil, Prozac, and Zoloft,
respectively)—are more easily administered than lithium by general
practitioners, internists, and psychiatrists. This ease of prescription is largely to
the good, although it makes it more likely that highly effective and relatively
inexpensive drugs such as lithium—which, in fact, is generally not that difficult

to prescribe or monitor properly—will be bypassed for other, better-marketed
drugs. It also increases the likelihood that the more popular and easier-to-
prescribe antidepressants may be given to patients who would benefit more from
a mood-stabilizing drug such as lithium and who may actually get worse on
antidepressants (that is, their episodes may increase in frequency and intensity,
and they may experience severely agitated or mixed states). Often
antidepressants and mood-stabilizing drugs need to be used together in order to
obtain the best therapeutic results.
In recent years, advances in psychiatric research have made the highly
profitable marketplace for mood-altering drugs far more competitive. Patients
unresponsive to lithium or unwilling to take it now have good alternatives
available to them. The most commercially successful of these, valproate
(Depakote), an anticonvulsant, has now overtaken lithium as the most widely
prescribed, and often the first prescribed, medication for bipolar disorder, or
manic-depressive illness. This is a striking reversal in prescription patterns.
There has also been a marked increase in the total number of prescriptions
written for depression and bipolar disorder over the course of the past five years
(a trend even more dramatic for the prescription of antidepressants), which
reflects an increase in media and public awareness of the availability of effective
medical treatment for mood disorders; impressive educational work on the part
of patient advocacy groups; and highly effective physician and public marketing
campaigns financed by the major pharmaceutical companies.
The ability of the anticonvulsant medications (valproate, carbamazepine,
gabapentin, lamotrigine, and topiramate) to prevent suicide is unproven,
however. Hypothetically, because they stabilize moods and have an impact on
agitated and aggressive states, they should have an impact on suicide rates as
well. In the one direct comparison of lithium and an anticonvulsant
(carbamazepine, or Tegretol), however, this did not prove to be true. German
doctors studied 378 hospitalized patients who suffered acute major depression
(one-half suffered from bipolar manic-depression) and, at the time they were
discharged 
from 
the 
hospital, 
randomly 
assigned 
them 
to 
lithium,
carbamazepine, or amitriptyline (an antidepressant) treatment. Over the
subsequent two and one-half years, five patients killed themselves and four made
very serious suicide attempts. All the patients who killed themselves, or tried to,
were in the carbamazepine or antidepressant treatment group. Despite the fact
that there had been more prior, pretreatment suicide attempts in the group that
received lithium, none of the suicides or suicide attempts that occurred during
the treatment period were made by patients taking lithium. The authors of the
study concluded that their research demonstrated that lithium had “antisuicidal

effects which may have been specific, which markedly exceeded its prophylactic
efficacy, and which were superior to the effects of carbamazepine and
antidepressants on suicidal behavior.”
The same researchers also believe that lithium appears to protect against
suicide even in those patients who do not show a good mood-stabilizing
response to the drug. In a recent study, patients who had attempted suicide at
least once were classified as excellent, questionable, or poor responders to
lithium when it was given to prevent severe depressive episodes. There was in
each group, despite the variability in recurrence rates, a significant decrease in
the number of suicide attempts. Bruno Müller-Oerlinghausen of the Free
University of Berlin summarized his group’s findings: “Discontinuing lithium or
switching to other medications in apparently nonresponding patients may be
considered a rational step toward optimizing medication, but it may result in the
death of the patient.”
It may well be that future research will show an antisuicidal effect of the
anticonvulsant medications. Certainly they provide a real and important
alternative to lithium for many patients. But in light of the many studies
demonstrating lithium’s ability to prevent suicide in high-risk patients and the
utter dearth of studies documenting this for the anticonvulsants, caution is in
order. The clinical problem is complex, however. Not everyone who has
depression or manic-depression is suicidal. If a patient refuses to take lithium or
does not respond to it, anticonvulsants provide an important and often more
agreeable treatment alternative. Lithium is effective in preventing suicide only if
patients are willing to take it and if they respond to it. Not everyone will take it.
Not everyone will respond to it.
Ultimately, the best course of treatment for many patients may be a
combination of lithium, used as a hedge against suicide, with another mood
stabilizer or with an antipsychotic, antidepressant, or antianxiety medication.
Because the cost of lithium is far less than that of valproate, the economic factor
is a further issue, although the additional expense for the newer antidepressant,
anticonvulsant, and antipsychotic medications is often cost-effective and
clinically warranted due to increased compliance and greater safety and efficacy.

Antidepressant use at time of suicide
Antidepressant medications are not as obviously effective in lowering suicide
rates as lithium is, although there are many practical problems in showing a
clear-cut impact of antidepressant medications on suicide rates. (One reason for
this is simple: suicidal patients are almost always excluded from clinical drug
trials.) But there is persuasive evidence that the newer antidepressants, the
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (or SSRIs), not only alleviate and prevent
depression but also decrease angry, aggressive, and impulsive behaviors. These
effects on such dangerous risk factors for suicide are immensely important.
Some epidemiological and clinical studies have shown a decrease in the number
of suicides and serious suicide attempts in patients taking antidepressants, but
the extent of the decrease remains equivocal.
What is unequivocal, however, is that in every investigation of individuals
who have committed suicide, researchers have demonstrated that depression has
been underdiagnosed and antidepressants have been underprescribed. Even when
antidepressants have been prescribed, they have been given at inadequate
dosages or for too short a period of time for them to take effect. This gross
undertreatment of depression is shown in the graph on the opposite page, a

summary of seven American and European toxicology and autopsy
investigations that calculated the percentage of depressed individuals actually
taking antidepressants at the time they committed suicide. The majority of
patients had not been taking antidepressants at all, and far fewer still had been
taking a therapeutic amount. The undertreatment of depression is consistent with
research showing that doctors in general woefully underprescribe antidepressants
and lithium for patients who could benefit from them.
Several additional interpretations are possible. In the earlier studies, more
individuals with depressive illnesses were taking antidepressants at the time they
committed suicide than those in recent years. This may reflect the fact that the
earlier antidepressants worked less well, or it may reflect the fact that, because
the tricyclic antidepressants were far more toxic than the modern SSRIs, very
suicidal patients had access to a more deadly means of suicide.
There have been other difficulties in demonstrating a clear effect of
antidepressant medications on patterns of suicidal behavior. There is, we know, a
high rate of suicide in patients with bipolar II disorder, a variant of manic-
depressive illness characterized by extended periods of depression and shorter,
mild episodes of mania. These patients are frequently misdiagnosed as suffering
from depression only; this is in part because the mild manias are not experienced
by the patients as pathological and in part because doctors are inadequately
trained to make the differential diagnosis. Many clinicians are unaware that
mood volatility and irritability are often signs of bipolar illness, and they do not
inquire specifically enough about other sleep, mood, and behavioral symptoms
that are important in making the diagnosis. Doctors also make the diagnostic
error because depression is far more likely than mild mania to motivate a person
to seek clinical care. This underdiagnosis of bipolar manic-depressive illness is
widespread—perhaps one-third of patients are inaccurately diagnosed as
depressed, rather than bipolar—and it can result in treatment that makes the
illness worse over time. Antidepressants, if prescribed alone, rather than with
mood stabilizers such as lithium or the anticonvulsants, can precipitate mania
and, occasionally, highly agitated and potentially suicidal mixed states.
Accurate diagnosis and the appropriate treatment of psychiatrically ill children
and adolescents are material problems. A 1999 survey of pediatricians and
family doctors found that only 8 percent of those prescribing antidepressants for
children felt they had received adequate training in treating childhood
depression. Many children with early-onset manic-depression, or bipolar
disorder, are mistakenly diagnosed as suffering from attention deficit disorder
with hyperactivity, either because doctors do not recognize the symptoms of
manic-depression in children or because they are unduly sensitive to subtle

pressures from parents and teachers who feel there is less stigma attached to
attention deficit disorder than there is to a major psychiatric illness. Although
there are overlapping symptoms—hyperactivity, distractibility, and irritability,
for instance—and the differential diagnosis can be difficult, there are many
distinguishing features: bipolar children are more likely to have a family history
of bipolar illness or depression, to have mood lability, euphoria, grandiosity,
hypersexuality, less need for sleep, and racing thoughts, and to be suicidal. Their
pre-illness social and academic histories tend to be good and their illness is often
a sharp departure from their normal level of functioning. The correct diagnosis is
important because the primary treatment for attention deficit disorder is
stimulant medication, which may aggravate the condition of a child with bipolar
disorder (a disorder that generally requires a mood stabilizer such as lithium or
an anticonvulsant). The long-term effect of the combined use of antidepressants
and stimulants in a child or adolescent with bipolar illness is unclear but
problematic.
The role of antidepressants in actually precipitating suicidal behavior is
controversial and unresolved. From a broad clinical and public health
perspective, the evidence is strong that antidepressants do not increase the
number of suicide attempts or actual suicide. On the contrary. But there is almost
certainly a vulnerable subgroup of individuals who become agitated, restless,
and virulently sleepless as a result of taking antidepressants. Although this is an
uncommon reaction, it is potentially dangerous, and all patients need to be
advised in advance of taking antidepressants that these side effects can occur,
and if they do, they should be reported to their doctors. (The manufacturers of
antidepressants generally include a warning to this effect in their product
information in the Physicians’ Desk Reference: “The possibility of a suicide
attempt is inherent in depression and may persist until significant remission
occurs. Close supervision of high risk patients should accompany initial drug
therapy. Prescriptions … should be written for the smallest quantity of capsules
consistent with good patient management, in order to reduce the risk of
overdose.” The manufacturers also include in the list of adverse effects anxiety,
nervousness, insomnia, agitation, akathisia, and central nervous system
stimulation.)
The newer SSRIs, although no more effective against depression than the
older tricyclic antidepressants, tend to be better tolerated by patients because
their side effects (occasional insomnia, agitation, nausea, or sexual problems) are
less difficult to live with than those caused by the tricyclics (dry mouth, blood
pressure changes, constipation, or dizziness). The SSRIs have also been used to
good effect in suicidal patients who are dependent on alcohol. Their major

clinical advantage, however, is that they are much less toxic and therefore less
likely to cause death in deliberate overdose. Lethal drug overdoses in British
women, for example, have declined by a third over the past two decades, despite
an increase in the rate of nonfatal overdoses during this period. Most of this
decline is attributable to the wider use of the newer, less toxic antidepressants.
There are other treatments for depression. Some existing drugs have effects on
both norepinephrine and serotonin reuptake, while others exert their primary
influence on serotonergic neurotransmission. Many new antidepressant
medications 
are 
under 
development. 
(The 
Pharmaceutical 
Research
Manufacturers of America reported that at the end of 1998 there were eighty-five
psychiatric drugs in the research pipe-line: twenty-three for Alzheimer’s disease,
nineteen for substance abuse, eighteen for depression, fifteen for schizophrenia,
and ten for other disorders.) Some of these drugs, like the existing SSRIs, are
designed to affect the serotonergic pathways in the brain; others have been
developed to focus not only on serotonin but a variety of other neurotransmitters;
yet others target different neurochemical systems, including norepinephrine. One
drug in the pipeline, for instance, decreases the level of “Substance P,” a
chemical that is highly concentrated in the amygdala and the hypothalamus,
areas of the brain that are intricately tied up with the regulation of mood and
emotion.
Additional drugs that may ultimately have an effect on suicidal behaviors are
under development. Some focus on the neurotransmitter glutamate and will, it is
hoped, decrease alcohol and drug cravings in individuals who are dependent on
those substances. Yet other drugs, known as CRH receptor antagonists, have
been developed to reduce the stress response, which, if it is severe, and if it
occurs in vulnerable persons, can trigger suicide.
Omega-3 fatty acids, implicated by some (but by no means all) researchers in
both depression and suicide, have been tested in recent clinical studies at
Harvard. On discharge from a psychiatric hospital, patients with bipolar illness
were, in addition to their regular dosages of valproate or lithium, given either
omega-3 fatty acids or a placebo. After four months, 64 percent of those taking
fatty acids were in remission but only 19 percent of those on placebo remained
well. The results were sufficiently significant that the researchers were obliged
to “break the blind” of the experimental condition, in order that those who were
on the placebo could be treated with the omega-3 fatty acids. To date, although
the research is very preliminary, there have been no serious adverse effects from
the fatty acids given to the patients in the study. A seventeen-year
epidemiological study of fish consumption in 265,000 Japanese adults—which
found a 19 percent reduction in suicides in those who consumed large amounts

of fish rich in omega-3 fatty acids—adds further suggestive evidence to the
fatty-acid hypothesis of depression. Still, the theory remains unproven until the
research findings are replicated.
St. John’s wort, a mild to moderate antidepressant taken from the yellow-
flowered plant Hypericum, is currently under study in a large clinical
investigation coordinated by Duke University Medical Center. It is widely used
as an antidepressant in Europe and more recently in the United States, but its
usefulness in preventing suicide is unknown. Because it is not considered a drug,
its purity and potency are unregulated by the Food and Drug Administration.
Without doubt, it is helpful to some individuals who are depressed, but because
it is usually taken without clinical supervision, there are several potential
difficulties. Many people assume that St. John’s wort and other herbal treatments
are safe simply because they are “natural” substances (as indeed, one should add,
are lithium and arsenic), but there have been reports, although rare, of rapid
mood swings, mania, and suicidal thinking induced by the herb. (These adverse
reactions have also been rarely observed in another unregulated treatment for
depression, light therapy.) More problematically, buying over-the-counter
treatments for potentially lethal medical conditions, such as severe depression,
may give the illusion of treatment and thereby prevent people from seeking out
more effective drugs if the depression or suicidal thoughts do not abate.
The antipsychotic medications used to treat schizophrenia and, occasionally,
manic-depressive illness share some of the same problems and promise in
preventing suicide that the antidepressants do. Used ineptly or without adequate
clinical supervision, they can cause akathisia, an extremely uncomfortable state
of agitation, muscle discomfort, and a difficulty in sitting still (often described
by patients as feeling as if they are “jumping out of their skin”). But used
carefully, in moderate doses, the antipsychotic medications—especially the more
recently developed ones that have fewer side effects, such as clozapine,
risperidone, and olanzapine (Clozaril, Risperdal, and Zyprexa, respectively)—
may reduce the rate of suicide in psychotically ill patients.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), sometimes known as “shock therapy,” has
been used for decades to treat severely suicidal patients. Although there is little
evidence of a long-term effect on suicide, profound and often rapidly induced
short-term improvements in suicidal mood are common in deeply depressed
patients. Keeping patients alive through an acute suicidal crisis is the most
important clinical priority; ECT not only can save lives, but it buys time to work
out the best long-term treatment.
Although ECT is the most effective and rapid treatment for severe depression,
it remains controversial and, particularly in the United States, underutilized. This

is due in part to the highly negative media coverage of ECT (some of which was
clearly justified several decades ago, when abuses of shock treatments were
rampant) and in larger part to the availability and ease of use of alternative
treatments for depression. For many doctors, ECT remains the treatment of last
resort, even with highly suicidal patients. This has led Jonathan Himmelhoch, a
psychiatrist at the University of Pittsburgh, to write, “The narcissistic ponderings
of psychiatrists whose political agenda supersedes their clinical experience must
not be allowed to keep patients who are suffering the most severe form of pain
from relief.” This is some truth in this remark, although the controversy over
ECT is unlikely to disappear. A new, noninvasive treatment technology,
transcranial magnetic stimulation, which involves placing a small, powerful
electromagnetic coil on the scalp and sending repetitive pulses of high-intensity
current to the brain, is now being tested in depressed patients. Transcranial
magnetic stimulation has antidepressant capabilities, but clinical efficacy and
safety studies are still in the very early stages. Unlike ECT, it does not require
anesthesia and does not involve inducing a seizure; so far at least, memory
impairment has not been reported as a significant adverse effect. It may or may
not have an effect on suicidal thinking and behavior.
Medications and other medical treatments are effective—often remarkably so
—in preventing or diminishing the pain and suffering of the major psychiatric
illnesses most closely linked to suicide. Less clearly, except in the case of
lithium and probably the antidepressants and the newer antipsychotics, they
lessen the chances that a suicidal individual will kill him- or herself.
Medications, hospitalization, and ECT save many but by no means all lives.
Psychotherapy or a strong therapeutic relationship with a doctor can make all the
difference in whether some patients ultimately live or die. The very success of
psychopharmacology in treating serious mental illness has had the unfortunate
effect of minimizing the importance of psychotherapy in healing patients and
keeping them alive. Most managed health care companies, for example, cover
the costs for medication visits, although often only very brief ones, but do not
provide any meaningful coverage for psychotherapy. Despite the extensive and
elegant series of studies conducted by Myrna Weissman and Gerald Klerman at
Yale University, which showed that the combination of psychotherapy and
antidepressants was more effective in treating depression than either treatment
alone, and despite convincing recent work from many groups in the United
States and Britain demonstrating better outcomes in bipolar and schizophrenic
patients who receive a combination of medications and psychotherapy rather
than drugs only, there remains a pervasive belief in many psychiatric and
research quarters that medication by itself is sufficient to deal with serious

mental illness.
Some of the reluctance to aggressively encourage psychotherapy in patients
who suffer from depression, manic-depression, severe personality disorders, or
schizophrenia is understandable. Psychotherapy is expensive, difficult, and time-
consuming to do and to study, and there are deep conflicts within the
psychotherapeutic community about which kinds of therapy work best for which
kinds of patients and illnesses; what the nature of clinical training should be; and
for how long psychotherapy should last. Territorial and economic disputes
between psychiatrists and clinical psychologists are legendary and often riven
with mistrust and resentment. It has been too easy to draw an arbitrary
distinction between psychological and biological factors in mental illness, and
nowhere has this divisiveness been more destructive than in the
conceptualization of the causes and treatments for suicidal behavior.
The complexity of the suicidal mind and brain demands for its care a
complexity of clinical thought and treatment. Psychotherapy alone, if used
without addressing or treating the underlying psychopathology or biological
vulnerabilities, is generally unlikely to prevent profoundly suicidal individuals
from killing themselves. The ability to diagnose psychopathology accurately and
to refer patients to colleagues for medication when necessary is a nonnegotiable
fundamental of good clinical practice. Not to do this is malpractice.
The polarization of opinions about the correct treatment of suicidal patients
was highlighted by a 1994 court ruling against Thomas Szasz, an influential
psychiatrist and vehement critic of the concept of mental illness, as well as an
adamant opponent of the use of “coercive” efforts to keep an individual from
committing suicide. Szasz’s philosophical opposition to “coercive” prevention of
suicide is based, in part, on his strongly held belief that there is no connection
between suicide and mental illness, a belief supported neither by the clinical and
scientific literature nor, indeed, by any data presented by Szasz himself. His
views, which had a strong professional and popular following in the 1960s and
1970s and are still widely cited, can best be conveyed by his own words:
Why do we now give psychiatrists special privileges to intervene vis-
à-vis suicidal persons? Because, as I have noted, in the psychiatric
view, the person who threatens or commits suicide is irrational or
mentally ill, allowing the psychiatrist to play doctor and thereby, like
other doctors, to save lives. However, there is neither philosophical or
empirical support for viewing suicide as different, in principle, from
other acts such as getting married or divorced, working on the
Sabbath, eating shrimp, or smoking tobacco. These and countless other

things people do are the result of personal decisions.… Psychiatrist
and patient are both lost in the existential-legal labyrinth generated by
treating suicide as if it constituted a psychiatric problem, indeed a
psychiatric emergency. If we refuse, however, to play a part in the
drama of coercive suicide prevention, then we shall be sorely tempted
to conclude that the psychiatrist and his suicidal patient richly deserve
one another and the torment each is so ready and eager to inflict on the
other.
For those who disagree with Szasz, and I obviously am one (and am grateful
that my psychiatrist was another), and believe that committing suicide is not
altogether the same thing as eating shrimp or working on the Sabbath, it was of
no little interest to read that in 1994 Szasz agreed to pay $650,000 to the widow
of one of his patients, a physician who had suffered from manic-depressive
illness and killed himself. The legal complaint filed against Szasz charged that
he instructed and advised his patient to stop taking lithium in June 1990; in
December of the same year, the doctor, after beating himself in the head with a
hammer and inflicting lacerations to his neck, hanged himself with battery
cables. The complaint further charged that Szasz had failed to render
“psychiatric medical care and treatment in conformity with the customary and
accepted sound standards of medical care,” “failed to properly diagnose and
treat,” “failed to provide proper therapy to treat manic depression,” and “failed
to keep adequate and proper medical records.” Although Szasz’s attorney
maintained that the patient had stopped taking lithium of his own accord and
Szasz himself did not concede he had committed malpractice, the court ruled
that the widow was to receive $650,000 in settlement. Szasz, despite his distaste
for the psychiatric establishment, was a member of the American Psychiatric
Association, and it was the organization’s malpractice insurance carrier that
ended up paying the settlement.
Philosophical views and assumptions about the causation of suicide, while
strongly held and necessarily and importantly debated, are not sufficient to
disregard the massive and credible medical, psychological, and scientific
research literature about suicide. Ignoring the biological and psychopathological
causes and treatments of suicidal behavior is clinically and ethically
indefensible. But so too is disregarding the psychological and social roots of
suicide and ignoring potentially useful psychological and social treatments. The
mental pain of the suicidal condition is engulfing and unbearable. The therapist,
as Ned Cassem at Harvard points out, must have the “capacity to hear out
carefully and to tolerate the feelings of despair, depression, anguish, rage,

loneliness, emptiness, and meaninglessness articulated by the suicidal person.
The patient needs to know that the therapist takes him seriously and
understands.” Directness on the part of the clinician is important, as is clear
communication about treatment, about expectations about the time course and
problems of recovery, and about ways to contact the therapist in case of
emergency.
Morag Coate, a British writer who suffered from severe, recurrent psychosis,
described the doctor’s role in saving her life:
Because the doctors cared, and because one of them still believed in
me when I believed in nothing, I have survived to tell the tale. It is not
only the doctors who perform hazardous operations or give life-saving
drugs in obvious emergencies who hold the scales at times between
life and death. To sit quietly in a consulting room and talk to someone
would not appear to the general public as a heroic or dramatic thing to
do. In medicine there are many different ways of saving lives. This is
one of them.
Most of the studies of psychotherapy, or of psychotherapy combined with
medication, have focused on the treatment of psychiatric illness; few have dealt
specifically with measuring changes in suicidal thinking or behavior. Marsha
Linehan, a psychologist at the University of Washington, recently reviewed
twenty controlled clinical trials utilizing different forms of psychotherapy with
patients at high risk of suicide. In most studies, the patients were selected on the
basis of having made at least one suicide attempt. The psychotherapeutic
interventions that seemed to be most effective, particularly in patients with
borderline personality disorder, sharply focus on changing specific suicidal
behaviors and thoughts. These therapies, especially those that are based on
identifying and modifying maladaptive behaviors and thinking, appear to work
reasonably well in decreasing deliberate self-harm. Keith Hawton at the
University of Oxford, in a comprehensive review that included studies of both
psychotherapy and medication effects, also found promising results in altering
suicidal behaviors. Specific emphasis in several investigations was placed on
teaching patients to more effectively handle situations of interpersonal conflict,
which, for many of them, had preceded their suicide attempts. It remains unclear
whether these therapies prevent actual suicide or suicide attempts only.
Psychotherapy can be extremely helpful not only in sustaining patients
through times of terrible psychological suffering and encouraging them to learn
better ways of handling suicidal impulses but also in helping them to deal with

the critical and gnarly problem of treatment noncompliance. An unwillingness to
take medications as prescribed or to keep psychotherapy or medical
appointments is a pervasive and potentially life-threatening problem.
Many patients never fill even their initial prescriptions, either because they do
not want to take medication or because they cannot afford it; many more stop
taking their medication after a few days, weeks, or months of treatment because
they experience unpleasant or disabling side effects, feel well and see no point in
continuing in treatment, find their dosage schedules too confusing, or simply do
not believe they have a psychiatric illness. Perhaps 20 percent of all medical
patients on long-term maintenance medications take “holidays” (that is, they
stop their medications for a period of time); this can be catastrophic, especially
with drugs such as lithium that clear from the body very rapidly.
Compliance is less than ideal in most patients who have any kind of chronic
illness. (By way of comparison, in medical conditions such as epilepsy, chronic
lung diseases, hypertension, and glaucoma, overall compliance rates range
between 50 and 75 percent.) For patients taking antidepressants, the compliance
rate is between 65 and 80 percent; for antipsychotic medications, about 55
percent; and for lithium, about 60 percent. (The one study that directly compared
one-year compliance rates with lithium and valproate, the anticonvulsant, found
compliance rates of 59 percent and 48 percent, respectively.) Compliance rates
are even lower in patients who have attempted suicide and who have been given
follow-up appointments by emergency room staff or by nurses, doctors, or social
workers on the inpatient wards of psychiatric hospitals.
Psychotherapy increases medication compliance in many patients with
psychiatric illnesses, and some, but not all, of the programs designed to facilitate
follow-up treatment—programs that actively involve and educate patients and
their families, as well as emergency room doctors and nurses, about the gravity
of suicide attempts and the need for ongoing treatment; programs that facilitate
follow-up care through home visits or keeping in touch through letters or
telephone calls—have increased the likelihood that adolescents and adults at risk
of future suicidal behavior will enter—and stay—in treatment.
Individuals who are at risk of killing themselves because they have in the past
attempted suicide or been severely suicidal, who have psychiatric illnesses that
are closely linked to suicide, or who have a strong family history of suicide can
do several things to make suicide less likely. Being well informed about mental
illness, actively involved in their own clinical care, and very assertive about the
quality of medical and psychological treatment they receive is a good start.

Patients and their family members can benefit by actively seeking out books,
lectures, and support groups that provide information about suicide prevention,
depressive and psychotic illnesses, and alcoholism and drug abuse. They should
question their clinicians about their diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis and, if
concerned about a lack of collaborative effort or progress in their clinical
condition, seek a second opinion.
Those who are on medications should request, when possible, written
information about the drugs, their potential side effects, and which of the side
effects need to be reported to the doctor immediately. Certain medication side
effects, or flare-ups of symptoms in the underlying psychiatric illness, are of
particular concern if someone is suicidal, and these symptoms and side effects—
agitation, severe anxiety, marked sleeplessness, restlessness, delusions, feelings
of violence, or impulsivity—should be openly and quickly communicated to the
clinician. Several recent clinical studies have shown that teaching patients to
recognize early symptoms of their illnesses and drawing up written plans that
specify emergency steps to follow in case of relapse are helpful in avoiding the
kinds of escalation of illness that can lead to hospitalization, loss of jobs and
close relationships, or suicide.
If someone is acutely or potentially suicidal, guns, razor blades, alcohol,
knives, old bottles of medications, and poisons should be removed from the
home. Medications that can be used to commit suicide should be prescribed in
limited quantities or closely monitored, and alcohol use, which can worsen sleep,
impair judgment, provoke mixed or agitated states, and undermine the
effectiveness of psychiatric medications, should be discouraged.
The recovery from severe depression or psychosis is a deceptively difficult
and dangerous time. This has become especially true in recent years because the
length of psychiatric hospitalizations has gone from years or months to only
days. Patients leave the relative safety of a hospital, often still very ill, and return
to their disruptive lives and chaotic moods.
More than forty years ago, Sylvia Plath wrote in her journal, “And, when our
lives crack, and the loveliest mirror cracks, is it not right to rest, to step aside and
heal?,” but few now have the time or financial resources to heal as they should.
Medications take a painfully long time to take hold, and the recovery period is
jagged, discouraging, and never easy. A setback after finally feeling better again
can be devastating, if not lethal. The frustration and rockiness of this period can
be predicted, and the clinician’s doing so can take away some of the sting.
Almost inevitably, family members and friends are drawn into the painful
world of possible suicide. They, too, can be most helped, and helpful, by being
educated about the clinical situation; learning about the illness and its

treatments; inquiring about reasonable expectations for recovery and the likely
time course involved; and seeking out information and help from patient support
and advocacy groups. If a family member or friend is acutely suicidal, it may be
necessary to take away their credit cards, car keys, and checkbooks and to be
supportive but firm in getting them to an emergency room or walk-in clinic. If
the person is violent, it may be necessary to call the police. These are difficult
things to do but often essential.
The National Depressive and Manic-Depressive Association, a national
patient-run advocacy and support group based in Chicago, makes the following
specific recommendations to family members and friends who believe someone
they know is in danger of committing suicide:
Take your friend or family member seriously.
Stay calm, but don’t underreact.
Involve other people. Don’t try to handle the crisis alone or jeopardize your
own health or safety. Call 911 if necessary.
Contact the person’s psychiatrist, therapist, crisis intervention team, or
others who are trained to help.
Express concern. Give concrete examples of what leads you to believe your
friend [or family member] is close to suicide.
Listen attentively. Maintain eye contact. Use body language such as moving
close to the person or holding his or her hand, if it is appropriate.
Ask direct questions. Find out if your friend [or family member] has a
specific plan for suicide. Determine, if you can, what method of suicide he
or she is thinking about.
Acknowledge the person’s feelings. Be empathetic, not judgmental. Do not
relieve the person of responsibility for his or her actions.
Reassure. Stress that suicide is a permanent solution to temporary problems.
Provide hope. Remind your friend or family member that there is help and
things will get better.
Don’t promise confidentiality. You may need to speak to your loved one’s
doctor in order to protect the person. Don’t make promises that would
endanger your loved one’s life.
If possible, don’t leave the person alone until you are sure they are in the
hands of competent professionals.
There are several excellent advocacy and research organizations, many of
which have patient and family support groups and all of which are actively

involved in issues having to do with suicide prevention and mental illness.
(Further information about these groups is given in the Appendix.)
Often it is helpful, when a potentially suicidal person is improved or well, to
have a contingency planning meeting that involves the doctor or therapist, family
members, and friends. Not only is the individual who is at risk less likely to be
guarded or confused, he or she is better able to express clear and highly specific
wishes for treatment: who is to be contacted and how, what others can do that is
helpful, what others may do that is not helpful. Patients who decide, when
rational, that if they again become suicidal they wish to be hospitalized or
receive antipsychotic medications or undergo electroconvulsive therapy, but who
also know that they are unlikely, when ill, to consent to this, may in some areas
of the country draw up “Odysseus” arrangements. Based on the mythic
character’s request to be strapped to the mast of his ship so that he might avoid
the inevitable call of the Sirens, Odysseus agreements (or advanced instruction
directives) allow patients to agree to certain treatments in advance.
Parents, if there is a history of mental illness or suicide in the family, can help
their children who may be at risk. By knowing their family’s psychiatric
histories, being educated about the symptoms and available treatments for
mental illness, and discussing these issues openly and in a matter-of-fact way
with their children, parents make it more likely that the children will seek help if
they become depressed or start using alcohol or drugs. College-age children are
at particular risk for mental illness and suicide because first episodes of
depressive illnesses or schizophrenia are most likely to occur at this time; they
are away from home for the first time and subject to new stresses; they may use
alcohol or drugs more heavily; or they may radically alter their sleep pattern,
which can, in turn, precipitate a psychotic episode.
I am often amazed at how many parents who will check into the social and
athletic facilities of a college, visit the libraries and residence halls, and request
the success rates of the college in getting its graduates into law school, medical
school, or doctoral programs do not inquire into the quality and accessibility of
its student health facilities. Counseling and psychiatric services vary enormously
in quality from campus to campus, and it can be helpful to make inquiries about
how well the student health center deals with students who have mental illness.
It is also a good idea to obtain from the psychiatry department of the nearest
teaching hospital or medical school a list of clinicians who are specialized and
competent in the treatment of psychiatric disorders. Mental health advocacy
groups such as the National Alliance for the Mentally Ill and the National
Depressive and Manic-Depressive Association also can be helpful in providing
information about local clinicians and support groups. The list will hopefully

never be used, but getting it in advance makes sense. The same parents who have
ensured that their children are educated about AIDS, sexually transmitted
diseases, and drug abuse often do not discuss the symptoms of depression, an
illness that is common, potentially lethal, and highly treatable. Yet only accidents
are more likely than suicide to cause death in this vulnerable age group.
Fortunately, students are beginning to take it upon themselves to educate their
fellow students about mental illness. (University and college administrations are
now somewhat more aware of the prevalence of mental illness in their
undergraduates and graduate students and increasingly shaken into action by the
too-frequent suicides of young people. But they are not nearly aware or active
enough.) I have had the pleasure and privilege of meeting with hundreds of
students across the country, many of whom have struggled for years against
severe depression, manic-depressive illness, or alcoholism. A disturbing number
have nearly died from their suicide attempts. Rarely do their parents or
professors have any idea of the extent of their suffering or what it takes for them
simply to show up for class, take their examinations, or write their papers.
I recently met with a group of students at Harvard University who had
established a mental illness awareness program for students on campus. They
sponsor lectures, work with a professor from the psychiatry department who acts
as their adviser, maintain a Web site, and run a support group for students who
suffer from mental illness. The founder of the group, Allison Kent, is a gutsy,
lively, and warm young woman who has turned her own pain from manic-
depression into a great source of hope and support for others. She has described
her own experience as a student:
I have a mental disorder. When I got sick my freshman year, I
remember flipping through The Unofficial Guide to Life at Harvard
and other publications, frantically looking for a peer group addressing
mental illnesses. I had thought Harvard had a group for just about
everything. I mean there couldn’t be a Free Thought Society, a Texas
Club, and an Anime Society and not one addressing an issue as basic
as mental health. But I was wrong. The only thing I found was that the
stigma that mental illnesses have in society was just as prevalent and
pervasive here at Harvard.…
Take a look around at your fellow students some day. Realize that I
am not unusual. We are often hidden, the mentally ill, but we are
hidden both in homeless shelters and at Harvard. Help reduce our
burden by educating yourself and your friends about the pervasiveness
of mental illness and learn about how it can be successfully treated. As

we acknowledge our own vulnerability and accept vulnerabilities in
others, we make the world easier to live in for all of us, not just the
mentally ill. No one should need to cry herself to sleep alone.

CHAPTER 9
As a Society
—THE PUBLIC HEALTH—
As a society, we do not like to talk about suicide.
—DAVID SATCHER, M.D., PH.D.,
Surgeon General of the United States
MORE THAN three thousand people turned out for the funeral of John Wilson in May
1993, and thousands more lined the streets of Washington to watch as his coffin
passed. Wilson’s death stunned the nation’s capital, where he had served with
impatient intelligence as chairman of the D.C. Council. Those of us who live in
Washington and who were hopeful that he would some day be elected mayor
were horrified to hear that the blunt, charismatic Wilson, only forty-nine years
old, had hanged himself. Rumors of mercurial outbursts and erratic behavior had
circulated for months, but his suicide was a shock. It forced an
uncharacteristically reflective pause in the city’s rushing ways and, within hours,
provoked a rash of questions: How could so admired and well loved a man—
elegant, vivacious, and scathingly witty—do such an irremediable thing? Did he
know, or was he just past caring, that his suicide would be devastating to those
whose hopes and lives he represented? Would his suicide have an imitative,
cascading effect, especially on other African-American men in the city? Had he
been in treatment? Was he taking medication? If so, what kind? Most of all,
could society—or the medical system—have prevented Wilson’s suicide?
John Wilson was no stranger to depression. The illness ran in his family, and
he had, on at least four earlier occasions, tried to kill himself—he had slashed his
wrists, played Russian roulette, taken an overdose of his antidepressant
medications, and attempted to hang himself. During the course of his last illness,
his psychiatrist, family, and close friends had pleaded with him to check into a
hospital, but he had refused. Perhaps he thought there was nothing that could
help him; but he also hoped to be mayor some day and believed, at a visceral
level, that hospitalization would be political suicide. Probably he was right, but

possibly not. In any event, he killed himself before the city could show its
subtler colors.
Accounts of Wilson’s last few weeks reveal a man captured by private despair
and slowly unraveling in public. Peter Perl, in the Washington Post, describes his
final days:
What was constant, his friends say, was an unrelieved grayness
seeping into him, taking over. “What finally closed in on John … was
bigger than just the question of running for mayor” or pursuing other
career options. “He was more depressed, and depressed more
consecutively.… He became darker and less shakable from the grip of
depression.”
Only once did Wilson talk in public about the pain of his depression.
On May 7 [less than two weeks before he killed himself] he scrapped a
prepared text on children and violence, and instead began revealing his
own illness to a group of psychiatrists and other professionals at a
meeting of the D.C. Mental Health Association. “We can talk about me
being a politician, but we can also talk about me as a person who deals
with depression, a very painful, very difficult disease … [that] leads to
a great feeling of being lost, of a hole in your body,” he said. He told
them the disease was particularly deadly in the black community,
where people played “Russian roulette” with their lives, and said, “I
believe that more people are dying of depression than are dying of
AIDS, heart trouble, high blood pressure, anything else, simply
because I believe depression brings on all of those diseases.” The
audience was stunned, but according to association director Anita
Sheldon, none of the people who came up to Wilson afterward talked
to him about his illness.
Wilson became increasingly strange and morose in public
appearances, but most people attributed his behavior to his customary
moodiness. In his final taping of a TV show he hosted on D.C. cable,
Wilson was alternately laughing, stuttering and rambling … he
concluded the monthly show by saying, “We’ll be back next week, I
guess.”
At a May 12 hearing on Capitol Hill on the D.C. budget, he
discarded his prepared speech—“the people who wrote this would die
if I didn’t read it, so they are going to die”—and proceeded to ramble
extemporaneously 
before 
the 
House 
District 
of 
Columbia

appropriations committee: “Mr. Chairman, I am at the end of a
political career, I am arriving at the end of a political career and I have
served this government, I think, well for 18 years.… So, Mr.
Chairman, I come to you today as a tired, weary old man, who is
losing his hair, who is becoming extremely, extremely frightened to
death of the District of Columbia’s financial situation.… I am
frightened. I don’t know what to do anymore.”
The day before he killed himself, Wilson presided over a crowded city
hearing; he was intermittently lucid and volatile. At one point, in front of
television cameras and a room full of people, he exploded with rage and stalked
out of the hearing room. Later he returned to the meetings but was rambling and
incoherent. Despite this, at least one close friend remarked that he had looked
upbeat and jovial, “like he didn’t have a care in the world.” The next day, when
he did not show up for work, his chauffeur and his wife drove to Wilson’s house,
where they found him hanging dead in the basement.
A superb politician and a prominent civil rights leader, the ambitious and
wildly successful son of a porter for the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad was dead by
his own hand. He was dead from depression, dead from his concerns about how
the public would respond if they knew of his mental illness or if they knew that
he had been hospitalized for it. Dead, too, because the illness he had made it
difficult for others to know how to reach out to him: no one knew how to deal
with a public figure who was unstrung and unpredictable. Dead because
psychiatric commitment laws protect civil liberties but not necessarily lives. And
dead because we as a society fail to deal in a tolerant or informed way with
serious mental illnesses, addictions, or suicide.
What could society have done to have made it acceptable to sign into a
hospital, and what could it have done to make it unnecessary and unimaginable
to throw a rope over a pipe?
DOCTORS, WHO ought to be in the best position to help the public, are not distinguished
by their own ability to help one another or themselves. They are, to start with,
twice as likely to kill themselves as other people are. Psychiatrists and
anesthesiologists are especially vulnerable, and women physicians even more so;
in fact, women doctors are three to five times more likely than the general public
to kill themselves. (Women psychologists and chemists, but not teachers, have
similarly elevated suicide rates. Men in these professions do not. It may be that
there is a selection factor—high energy and volatility, with an associated mood

disorder—for women who go into, and succeed in, highly competitive and male-
dominated fields. Women also probably experience greater levels of stress due to
the demands of bringing up children, the prejudice of colleagues and patients,
and loyalties torn between personal and career lives. Those in medicine and
science also have a familiarity with, and access to, highly lethal methods of
suicide.)
Doctors, more often than not, are left alone to struggle with their suffering.
Many find it hard to ask for help or, indeed, to acknowledge needing it: they are
trained to be independent, to be accountable for decisions that cost or save lives,
and to assume an undue portion of the miseries of others. They function within a
closed system that too often discourages seeking treatment and has, as well, the
power to deny or rescind medical licenses and hospital privileges and to affect
the flow of patient referrals. Highly addictive and lethal drugs are readily
available, stress and depression are common, and sleep deprivation—a source of
fatigue and bad judgment, as well as a potential precipitant of mental illness—is
pervasive. Self-medication with alcohol, drugs, or mood-altering medications
can be, and often is, disastrous.
Doctors must recognize and take care of their own problems and those of their
colleagues, in addition to those of the patients they treat. They must attend to
deeply ingrained attitudes and prejudices about mental illness and suicide as
well. The compassion and scientific knowledge they bring to the care of other
medical illnesses are not always a part of treating the mentally ill. Doctors
confronted with suicide or suicidal behavior often find it incomprehensible or
threatening. Yale surgeon Sherwin Nuland, for example, observes that for the
family members or friends of someone who has killed himself, “things seem
inexplicable.… But for the uninvolved medical personnel who first view the
corpse, there is another factor to consider, which hinders compassion. Something
about acute self-destruction is so puzzling to the vibrant mind of a man or a
woman whose life is devoted to fighting disease that it tends to diminish or even
obliterate empathy. Medical bystanders, whether bewildered and frustrated by
such an act, or angered by its futility, seem not to be much grieved at the corpse
of a suicide. It has been my experience to see exceptions, but they are few. There
may be emotional shock, even pity, but rarely the distress that comes with an
unchosen death.”
Yet nearly a third of those who kill themselves visit a physician in the week
before they die, and more than a half do so in the month prior to committing
suicide. Most do not say they are suicidal, and most are not asked. Even for
mental health professionals, as we have seen, recognizing and appropriately
treating a suicidal patient are not always easy things to do. Some doctors remain

skeptical that general medical practitioners can or should be put in the position
of screening for or treating suicidal patients; others persevere in the erroneous
belief that if they ask their patients about suicide, they will somehow encourage
the act. Accumulating evidence suggests, however, that educating doctors about
recognizing and treating depressive illness may have an impact on the suicide
rate.
In the early 1980s, the Swedish Committee for the Prevention and Treatment
of Depression introduced an educational program for all general practitioners on
the Swedish island of Gotland. The doctors attended comprehensive lectures on
the causes, classification, and treatment of depressive illnesses; they also learned
about more specific areas of clinical concern, such as the diagnosis and
treatment of children, adolescents, and the elderly. Follow-up studies showed
that the doctors who had participated in the intensive educational program were
better able to identify patients with depression and were more accurate in the
treatments they prescribed. The overall suicide rate on the island decreased more
than did the rate for Sweden as a whole; specifically, the proportion of suicides
due to depressive illness decreased. Although the methods used to determine
changes in the suicide rate have been debated by some researchers, as has the
durability of the change, the results have been impressive to many public health
physicians. They have been encouraged by the potential of an educational
program to make an impact on a problem that has remained more resistant to
change than virtually any other major cause of death.
Doctors who are in frequent and direct contact with very suicidal patients are
in a more obvious position to prevent suicides than general practitioners are.
Medical staff in emergency rooms, for example, treat patients who have
attempted suicide and therefore are at high risk for eventually killing themselves.
The American Foundation for Suicide Prevention has developed a poster to be
placed in emergency rooms across the United States that highlights, for both
nonspecialists and psychiatrists, the major clinical predictors of suicide, as well
as minimal steps that should be taken by clinicians to decrease the chance of its
occurring. Reaching out to those doctors and patients, it is hoped, will save at
least some, if not many, lives.
Widespread screening of patients in more general medical practices, however,
has not been shown to be particularly effective; neither the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention in the United States nor the Canadian Task Force set up
to study the feasibility of such a screening process recommends it. In the future,
though, it may well be that automated interviews conducted with a computer,
which do not place a heavy burden on the limited time of general practitioners
and which, research indicates, elicit more accurate reports of suicidal ideation

and alcohol consumption than those obtained by clinicians, will be used
routinely.
Identifying and treating people at high risk for suicide involves not only
doctors, of course, but many other individuals, organizations, and intervention
strategies as well. National Depression Screening Day, which began as a pilot
program at a local hospital in Massachusetts, has, since 1991, reached out to a
more self-selected group of individuals from the public. In October of each year,
in thousands of clinics, hospitals, libraries, businesses, and shopping malls
across America, people fill out a brief depression checklist. If they request a
referral for treatment, or if their depression score indicates they should be more
thoroughly evaluated by a clinician, they are. (Twenty percent of those screened
are severely depressed, but of those only one in ten is in treatment.) More than
400,000 people, many of them at significant risk for suicide, have participated in
the screening program since it began. When a similar depression symptom
checklist was published recently in nationally syndicated Parade magazine,
along with a telephone contact number, more than 100,000 telephone calls were
received within two weeks. Only a small minority of those who called were in
treatment.

In the future, there will almost certainly be biological tests to assess suicidal
risk. These tests—whether for specific genetic markers, measures of serotonergic
functioning, or neuroimaging studies designed to detect neurochemical and
anatomical changes associated with an increased risk of suicide—will at best
predict only partially. All are likely to be fraught with clinical and ethical
problems. There will inevitably be ambiguities and inaccuracies in interpreting
test results and uncertainty about their specificity and predictiveness. There also
will be psychological consequences for the individuals who are tested, as well as
for their families (and perhaps employment and insurance repercussions, as
well), and there are bound to be issues surrounding the cost of and fair access to
the tests. If and when these biological tests become available, however, and if

they add to our ability to predict suicide or ascertain those at high risk, they will
be a tremendous advance on what we now can do.
For the moment, we know that some groups of individuals are much more
likely to kill themselves than others: those who have previously made serious
attempts; those who suffer from depression, manic-depression, alcoholism,
schizophrenia, or personality disorders; patients who have recently been released
from psychiatric hospitals; young men in jails or prisons, especially those who
are mentally ill, isolated, or living in overcrowded spaces; police officers;
gamblers; the unemployed; homosexual and bisexual men (who have a higher
risk for suicide attempts but not as clearly as for suicide); Native Americans;
Alaskan adolescents; and, increasingly, young African-American males.
Worldwide, young women in China and adolescent boys in Micronesia are
among those at particularly high risk for suicide.
Schools, communities, and national governments have tried, in very different
ways, to deal with the problem of suicide prevention in these high-risk groups,
as well as in more general populations. Results have been mixed. Most
schoolbased suicide awareness programs, though clearly well intentioned, have
not been effective and, in some instances, have been inaccurate, misleading, and
even damaging. Some investigators report an improvement in children’s
knowledge and beliefs about suicide and others cite a decrease in suicidal
behavior. Studies commissioned by the governments of Australia, Canada, and
the United States have, however, questioned the utility of currently used
programs designed to increase awareness about suicide and its prevention. The
Australian review, for example, concluded that the data “do not support the
promotion of curriculum based suicide prevention programs, and certainly do
not support the mandating of such programs in our secondary schools.”
Canadians, likewise, found “insufficient evidence to support curriculum-based
suicide prevention programs for adolescents,” and a comprehensive American
survey of youth suicide prevention programs found “no justification” to mandate
such programs.
Why these discouraging findings? Is the problem with existing programs, or is
it inherent in most educational efforts for this age group? Identifiable problems
with existing programs and examples of success suggest an unrealized potential
for school-based intervention.
An extensive and withering analysis of school-based programs, published a
few years ago in The American Psychologist, focused on several specific
criticisms:
Many curriculum-based programs are not clearly founded on current

empirical knowledge of the risk factors of adolescent suicide. By
deemphasizing or denying the fact that most adolescents who commit
suicide are mentally ill, these programs misrepresent the facts. In their
attempt to destigmatize suicide in this way they may be, in fact,
normalizing the behavior and reducing potentially protective taboos.…
The incidence of adolescent suicide is sometimes exaggerated in
suicide prevention programs because one of the programs’ goals is to
increase awareness and concern about the problem.… The danger of
exaggeration is that students may perceive suicide as a more common,
and therefore more acceptable act.… Magnifying the incidence of the
problem is one indication that the developers of curriculum-based
programs have not heeded the substantial literature on the imitation or
contagion effect in adolescent suicide. Another is the common use of
print or visual media to present case histories of adolescents who have
attempted or committed suicide. The purpose is to teach students how
to identify friends who may be at risk for suicidal behavior. However,
the method may have a paradoxical effect in that students may closely
identify with the problems portrayed by the case examples and may
come to see suicide as the logical solution to their own problems.…
Finally, at the most practical level, suicide prevention programs may
never reach their target population, adolescents most at risk for
suicide. Incarcerated and runaway youths, as well as dropouts, have
extremely high rates of suicide.
Other researchers and clinicians have criticized schoolbased programs for the
diffuseness of the audience they aim to reach (all students, rather than those at
highest risk), as well as the inaccuracy of the information given about suicide.
An in-depth study of 115 school-based suicide prevention programs for
adolescents discovered that most of them were only two hours or less in duration
and that the majority of the programs focused almost exclusively on a “stress
model” of suicide; that is, a model that assumes suicide is a response to extreme
stress and that in essence, given sufficient stress, suicide could happen to
anyone. Only 4 percent of the programs they reviewed presented the perspective
that suicide is usually a consequence of mental illness. Disturbingly, the
reviewers also discovered that “students who indicated having made a prior
suicide attempt (approximately 11% of the sample) reacted in a generally more
negative fashion to suicide prevention curricula. A greater proportion found the
program less interesting or helpful, and were troubled by the program.… [A]
greater proportion of prior attempters who attended a program than attempters

who didn’t attend said they would not want to reveal suicidal preoccupations to
others, stated they did not believe that they could be helped by a mental health
professional, and that suicide was a reasonable solution to problems.”
The results of such programs, although discouraging, point out some of the
difficulties that need to be resolved. It is clear that the medical dictum of “First,
do no harm” needs to be at the heart of any thinking about school programs
designed to prevent suicide. It is important, as well, that school administrations
avoid romanticizing suicide and that they place the primary emphasis of their
educational and screening efforts on recognition and treatment of mental illness
and substance abuse.
David Shaffer and his colleagues at Columbia University in New York have
developed a promising program that systematically screens high school students
for known predictors of suicide. (There are no lectures given about suicide, and
no responsibility is placed on teachers or students to “act like mental health
professionals.”) If, when a student fills out a brief self-report questionnaire, the
responses indicate that he or she may be at risk, he or she then completes a
computerized diagnostic interview. The computer generates a diagnostic
impression that is given to the clinician, who, in the third and final stage of the
process, personally interviews the student. On the basis of this interview, the
clinician determines whether the student should be referred for treatment. A case
manager gets in touch with the parents if treatment is necessary and helps to
facilitate follow-up care.
The Columbia program has been very effective in locating students at risk for
suicide and getting them into treatment. (Of the students who were identified
through the screening process as suffering from major depression, only a third
were in treatment. Of those who had actually attempted suicide, only half were
receiving treatment.) The screening system is now being used by more than
seventy groups worldwide, including schools in South Africa and Australia, as
well as in the United States.
Community-based suicide prevention programs, such as the Samaritans in
Britain and the Suicide Prevention Centers in America, have not had a
demonstrable effect on suicide rates. An early study suggested a possible
lowering of the suicide rate in communities that maintained Suicide Prevention
Centers, but virtually every study since has found little or no impact. This lack of
effect is counterintuitive in many ways, but not entirely surprising: Suicide
Prevention Centers and crisis hotlines, although very helpful to many people,
tend not to be used by the most severely depressed or suicidal individuals.
Additionally, many suicides are impulsive, which generally precludes contacting
anyone. An analysis of the types of patients and callers to Suicide Prevention

Centers suggests that the majority are in need of help but are not suicidal.
Suicide prevention is not just a clinical problem. Society must deal with the
potentially infectious repercussions of suicide, especially among the young, and
must somehow try to keep a single tragedy from progressing to deaths of others.
The contagious quality of suicide, or the tendency for suicides to occur in
clusters, has been observed for centuries and is at least partially responsible for
some of the ancient sanctions against the act of suicide. Epidemics of suicide
occurred among soldiers and citizens during Greek and Roman times, for
instance, as well as among worshipers of Odin in Viking society. Occasionally,
decisive action on the part of a leader prevented further catastrophe.
Six hundred years before Christ, for example, the king of Rome ended a
suicide epidemic among soldiers by declaring that the bodies of all suicides were
to be nailed to a cross and put on public display. In the fourth century B.C., to stop
a widespread epidemic of suicide among young Greek women, a local magistrate
decreed that “the body of every young woman who hanged herself should be
dragged naked through the streets by the same rope with which she committed
the deed.” The epidemic soon stopped. Centuries later, a similar law was passed
to halt a suicide epidemic among young women in Marseilles. Again, the threat
of public exposure and nakedness appeared to stop the wave of self-inflicted
deaths.
One grenadier in the army of Napoleon Bonaparte killed himself, and then
another did. Napoleon moved swiftly to stop the spread of suicide in his troops
by issuing an order:
The grenadier Groblin has committed suicide, from a disappointment
in love. He was, in other respects, a worthy man. This is the second
event of the kind that has happened in this corps within a month. The
First Consul directs that it shall be notified in the order of the day of
the guard, that a soldier ought to know how to overcome the grief and
melancholy of his passions; that there is as much true courage in
bearing mental affliction manfully as in remaining unmoved under the
fire of a battery. To abandon oneself to grief without resisting, and to
kill oneself in order to escape from it, is like abandoning the field of
battle before being conquered.
The order worked; no suicides were reported for a long time afterward.
The tendency for suicide to incite imitation, especially if the death is highly
publicized or romanticized, is persistent. In September 1774, Goethe published
The Sorrows of Young Werther, a book that portrayed a young man who shot

himself over the love of a woman. It became a best-seller, as well as the impetus
for a spate of suicides: young men were found dead by gunshot, dressed in blue
frock coats and yellow waistcoats, with a copy of Goethe’s novel nearby. In an
attempt to stop the epidemic of suicides, the book was banned in Italy, Germany,
and Denmark. In 1974, the sociologist David Phillips coined the phrase “Werther
effect” to describe the phenomenon of suicide contagion.
Suicide is contagious among family members, as well as among strangers or
acquaintances. Olive Anderson describes this in her book Suicide in Victorian
and Edwardian England:
There are many examples of a particular method of suicide running in
a family. Experienced coroners knew that one suicide was apt to breed
another of the same type, and some made it a rule never to return the
razor, cup or gun used for suicide to the relatives, even when they
asked for them as a memento, since a suicide instrument had a
dangerous fascination. They tried, too, to stop local publicity being
given to a suicide in the neighbourhood by an exotic method or in an
unusual place. Opinions differed over whether or not the act of suicide
itself was likely to be the result of “emotional contagion,” but all
agreed that the precise method or place chosen was often the result of
imitation. Nor was the field of contagion necessarily limited to the
local neighbourhood. The nation-wide publicity given by the press to
outstanding sensational or “human interest” stories wherever they took
place was repeatedly shown to be baneful and regretted.
There has been no shortage of suicide clusters in recent years: they have
occurred in psychiatric hospitals and clinics; in suburban America—Plano,
Texas; Leominster, Massachusetts; Clear Lake, Texas; Mankato, Minnesota;
Bucks County, Pennsylvania; Fairfax County, Virginia; South Boston; New
Jersey; South Dakota—and on college campuses (there were, for example, six
suicides within three months at Michigan State University). There have been
suicide outbreaks in Alaskan Eskimo villages, on Canadian Indian reservations,
in Japan, in England, and in virtually every country that keeps records of such
death patterns. Suicide clustering is primarily, but by no means entirely, a
phenomenon of the young. Its mechanisms are diverse and contested. Imitation
plays an important role, of course, but presumably a suicide disinhibits or
triggers suicidal behavior only in an already vulnerable individual (in a study of
two clusters of suicides in Texas, for example, one in which eight adolescents
enrolled in the same school district committed suicide within a fifteen-month

period and another in which six adolescents killed themselves within a two-to-
three-month period, those who committed suicide were more likely than control
subjects to have had a history of suicide attempts, threats, and self-destructive
behavior). Implausibility also weighs in. Adolescents often imagine that the
attention or retaliation denied to them in life may come their way through death
or that suicide is made more acceptable by its having been carried out by others
more famous or accomplished.
Many researchers believe that highly publicized media accounts of suicide
lead to an increase in suicidal behavior, while others are less certain. Most agree
that the strongest impact is on teenagers and concur that the content of the story
and the style in which it is reported—be it through newspapers, radio, television,
or film—have an influence for better or worse. In Austria, after members of the
media consulted with suicide experts, the sensationalized coverage of suicide
epidemics sharply declined. In Hungary, beginning in the early 1980s, the media
have given less coverage to prominent or sensational suicides and more to the
link between mental illness and suicide; the German media have also focused
more on the relationship between suicide and psychiatric disorders.
In 1994, in an attempt to minimize the possibility of suicide contagion, the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention published recommendations for the
media. The guidelines, while acknowledging that “suicide is often newsworthy,
and it will probably be reported,” also emphasized that “all parties should
understand that a scientific basis exists for concern that news coverage of suicide
may contribute to the causation of suicide” and that “public officials and the
news media should carefully consider what is to be said and reported regarding
suicide.” Specifically, the public health facility’s staff outlined certain aspects of
news coverage that can promote suicide contagion:
Presenting simplistic explanations for suicide. Suicide is never the result
of a single factor or event, but rather results from a complex interaction of
many factors and usually involves a history of psychosocial problems.
Public officials and the media should carefully explain that the final
precipitating event was not the only cause of a given suicide. Most persons
who have committed suicide have had a history of problems that may not
have been acknowledged during the acute aftermath of the suicide.
Cataloguing the problems that could have played a causative rode in a
suicide is not necessary, but acknowledgment of these problems is
recommended.
Engaging in repetitive, ongoing, or excessive reporting of suicide in the

news. Repetitive and ongoing coverage, or prominent coverage, of a suicide
tends to promote and maintain a preoccupation with suicide among at-risk
persons, especially among persons fifteen to twenty-four years of age. This
preoccupation appears to be associated with suicide contagion. Information
presented to the media should include the association between such
coverage and the potential for suicide contagion. Public officials and media
representatives should discuss alternative approaches for coverage of
newsworthy suicide stories.
Providing sensational coverage of suicide. By its nature, news coverage
of a suicidal event tends to heighten the general public’s preoccupation with
suicide. This reaction is also believed to be associated with contagion and
the development of suicide clusters. Public officials can help minimize
sensationalism by limiting, as much as possible, morbid details in their
public discussions of suicide. News media professionals should attempt to
decrease the prominence of the news report and avoid the use of dramatic
photographs related to the suicide (e.g., photographs of the funeral, the
deceased person’s bedroom, and the site of the suicide).
Reporting “how-to” descriptions of suicide. Describing technical details
about the method of suicide is undesirable. For example, reporting that a
person died from carbon monoxide poisoning may not be harmful;
however, providing details of the mechanism and procedures used to
complete the suicide may facilitate initiation of the suicidal behavior by
other at-risk persons.
Presenting suicide as a tool for accomplishing certain ends. Suicide is
usually a rare act of a troubled or depressed person. Presentation of suicide
as a means of coping with personal problems (e.g., the breakup of a
relationship or retaliation against parental discipline) may suggest suicide
as a potential coping mechanism to at-risk persons. Although such factors
often seem to trigger a suicidal act, other psychopathological problems are
almost always involved. If suicide is presented as an effective means of
accomplishing a specific end, it may be perceived by a potentially suicidal
person as an attractive solution.
Glorifying suicide or persons who commit suicide. News coverage is less
likely to contribute to suicide contagion when reports of community
expressions of grief (e.g., public eulogies, flying flags at half-mast, and
erecting permanent public memorials) are minimized. Such actions may
contribute to suicide contagion by suggesting to susceptible persons that
society is honoring the suicidal behavior of the deceased person, rather than
mourning the person’s death.

Focusing on the suicide completer’s positive characteristics. Empathy
for family and friends often leads to a focus on reporting the positive
aspects of a suicide completer’s life. For example, friends or teachers may
be quoted as saying the deceased person “was a great kid” or “had a bright
future” while avoiding mentioning the troubles and problems the deceased
person had. As a result, statements venerating the deceased person are often
reported in the news. However, if the suicide completer’s problems are not
acknowledged along with these laudatory statements, suicidal behavior may
appear attractive to other at-risk persons, especially those who rarely
receive positive reinforcement for desirable behaviors.
Through guidelines of this sort, and through other initiatives, the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention has demonstrated the potential benefits of active
leadership from public health authorities.
Society also has other ways of curbing suicide, most notably by limiting
access to deadly methods. Many of the safeguards we now try to put into place
have been used by other cultures in earlier times. Olive Anderson traces the
threads of modern suicide prevention to eighteenth- and nineteenth-century
attempts to set up social agencies to provide help for those in danger of killing
themselves. By the end of the eighteenth century, for example, English police
regularly patrolled London parks and bridges to thwart suicide attempts, and by
the midnineteenth century laws aimed at limiting the availability of poisons—the
Arsenic Act of 1851 and the Sale of Poisons and the Pharmacy Act of 1868—
had been passed. The development of new technologies inevitably led to new
methods of suicide—carbolic acid for cleaning, potassium cyanide for
photography, gas cookers, newly developed pesticides, and railways—and
legislation was hard pressed to keep up. Firearms could be regulated, and were,
but razors, ropes, and railway lines could not.
The twentieth century has seen many attempts to curtail access to fatal
methods: a drastic lowering in the carbon monoxide content of domestic gas; the
introduction of catalytic converters; major restrictions on the prescription of
barbiturates and other potentially deadly drugs; and the development of less
toxic antidepressant medications. These changes have shifted the pattern of
methods used for suicide, but debate rages over whether, if deprived of one
method, a suicidal person will simply reach out for a different one. The answer is
unclear. Certainly, detoxification of gas and limitations on access to deadly drugs
have caused suicide rates to fall in some countries. People do not automatically
switch to another method, but there are some who do. The extent of the
substitution of one suicide method for another is not entirely clear, and any

increase or decrease in suicide rate is seldom attributable to just one thing.
During perestroika, for example, Soviet premier Mikhail Gorbachev instituted a
massive, if short-lived, campaign to decrease alcohol consumption; prices shot
up and sales of alcohol plummeted. So did the suicide rate, which fell by 35
percent between the years of 1984 and 1988. Given the impact of alcohol on
depression and impulsive behavior, it would be surprising if the ebb in suicide
rates were not to some extent due to the restrictions on alcohol use. Yet during
this same time there were also extraordinary social changes in the former USSR
—changes that, however, increased overall mortality rates in other segments of
the population. It is hard to disentangle complicated social influences from their
disparate effects on the public health.
Gun control (and, to a lesser extent, alcohol restriction) are fiercely partisan
issues. Passions run feverishly high in the United States, for example, whenever
the topic of gun control is raised. But in 1996, 60 percent of the suicides in this
country were carried out with guns; indeed, the number of suicides by firearm
exceeded the number of firearm homicides. In study after study, a gun in the
home has been shown to be significantly associated with a higher risk of suicide,
especially among the young. Impulsivity, when coupled with an accessible and
deadly method, adds to the psychological and psychiatric vulnerability in this
age group.
Public health officials, trauma surgeons, emergency room doctors, medical
examiners, and mental health professionals have voiced professional outrage
over the proliferation of handguns and assault weapons. It is they who cannot
staunch the bleeding from bullet wounds, who must fill out the death certificates,
inform the parents, or dictate the autopsy reports. The American Academy of
Pediatricians, the American Pediatric Surgical Association, and the American
Trauma Society, among others, have adopted or proposed policies for the control
of the skyrocketing increase in suicides and homicides from firearm violence. A
survey of one thousand surgeons and internists, published in 1998, found that 84
percent of the surgeons and 72 percent of the internists thought that physicians
should be more actively involved in firearm injury prevention, including the
prevention of suicide. Most said they had received little or no education on the
subject, but virtually all of them expressed a desire to receive training that would
help them deal with the issue.
The American public shares many of the same concerns. A national survey of
adults conducted in 1998 found that 88 percent favor childproofing guns
(installing trigger locks or guaranteeing safe gun storage); 71 percent, the
personalization of guns (so-called smart guns, which will fire only after
“recognizing” the owner’s fingerprints, hand size, or specific radio transmissions

from a wristband); 82 percent, the use of magazine safeties (which prevent a
gun’s firing if the magazine or clip is removed); and 73 percent, the use of
devices that indicate whether a gun’s chamber is loaded. These seem like
intelligent, if minimal, actions for society to take. It is hard to imagine any
justification for making it easy for a child or an adolescent to kill himself.
The Swedish National Program to Develop Suicide Prevention has set specific
priorities for reducing the availability of other “instruments of suicide.” In
transportation, they recommend introducing modified ignition locks that open
only when the driver’s exhaled air contains no alcohol; introducing idling shutoff
devices activated by high carbon monoxide concentrations; extending exhaust
emissions controls to include carbon monoxide as well; introducing better-
designed exhaust systems to prevent carbon monoxide suicides; making air bags
standard on all cars; designing locomotive front ends so that, on impact, a person
will be pushed aside instead of run over; equipping with various forms of
protective device those subway stations that have a high frequency of accidents
and suicidal acts; and setting up protection (fences or nets) and SOS telephones
at particularly frequent suicide sites (tall buildings, bridges). For weapons, it
recommends safety grips on guns; separate storage of weapons and ammunition;
taking suicide risk into account in drawing up regulations for weapon
possession; and limited access to weapons for suicidal people. Finally, for
prescription drugs, it recommends developing less toxic drugs, as well as
suitable forms of administration and packaging; cautious prescription routines;
careful follow-up of patients; and efforts to restrict possession of toxic
prescription drugs by suicidal people.
Sweden, along with several other countries, including Norway, Finland, New
Zealand, and Australia, has developed a comprehensive strategy to reduce the
rate of suicide. Most of these national strategies include a strong component of
public and media education; a focus on increasing the awareness and treatment
of alcoholism, depression, and other mental illnesses; reduction of access to
deadly methods; and intensified training of health and other professionals. The
World Health Organization has outlined six basic steps for the prevention of
suicide, most of which center on reducing the availability of methods: more
effective treatment of mental disorders, gun possession control, detoxification of
domestic gas, detoxification of car emissions, control of toxic substance
availability, and toning down suicide reports in the media.
Several years ago, the United Kingdom set a specific goal for its national
health campaign: to reduce, by the year 2000, the rate of suicide by 15 percent.
The Royal College of Psychiatrists has run an active Defeat Depression
campaign throughout Britain. Its goals have been to reduce the stigma associated

with depression, to educate the public about depression and its treatments, and to
encourage those suffering from depression to seek treatment earlier rather than
later. Preliminary studies indicate that public attitudes toward depression and
psychological counseling have improved but that many people still regard
antidepressants as less effective than counseling or as potentially addictive. It is
too soon to know what effects the efforts of the British government, and those of
the Royal College of Psychiatrists, will have on the suicide rate. There is also in
Britain, as in most countries, a gap between the availability of mental health
services and the public’s awareness of that availability. In April 1999, the Mental
Health Foundation in London released the results of a survey taken of three
thousand people who had been asked to locate the telephone number they would
call if they, or someone they knew, needed immediate psychiatric care. Fifty
percent of the respondents were unable to locate the contact number of a local or
national hot line or their local social services; 30 percent could not find the
telephone number of their local National Health Service mental health service.
The United States waited until the last months of the twentieth century to
propose a coherent and comprehensive national strategy to prevent suicide.
There were, of course, many excellent suicide prevention programs in place
throughout the country, but there had been no unifying concept or sustained and
funded national leadership. In 1997, Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, whose father
killed himself and whose state consistently has had the highest suicide rate in the
nation, introduced a resolution in the U.S. Senate. Unanimously passed, it read
in part:
Resolved, That the Senate—
1. recognizes suicide as a national problem and declares suicide prevention to
be a national priority;
2. acknowledges that no single suicide prevention program or effort will be
appropriate for all populations or communities;
3. encourages initiatives dedicated to—
1. preventing suicide;
2. responding to people at risk for suicide and people who have
attempted suicide;
3. promoting safe and effective treatment for persons at risk for suicidal
behavior;
4. supporting people who have lost someone to suicide; and
5. developing an effective national strategy for the prevention of suicide;

and
4. encourages the development and the promotion of accessibility and
affordability, of mental health services, to enable all persons at risk for
suicide to obtain the services, without fear of any stigma.
The Senate resolution was an eloquent and important beginning and acted as a
catalyst for many government health agencies, suicide prevention programs,
mental health advocacy groups, and an imaginative, active grassroots
organization, the Suicide Prevention Advocacy Network, which is an alliance of
community activists, many of whom have lost a family member to suicide.
Working with Senator Reid, this network provided much of the impetus for a
recent consensus meeting, which developed a national strategy for suicide
prevention. These groups were brought together under the leadership of the
Surgeon General of the United States, David Satcher, a physician and former
director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Satcher is a natural
leader, one whose intelligence and compassion have eased the way for building
the kind of coalition necessary to put together a national strategy on suicide
prevention. His 1999 Surgeon General’s Report on Suicide is the first published
on the subject in the two hundred years of his office. The report calls for an
increase in public awareness of suicide and its risk factors; an improvement in
population-based and clinical services; and an investment in the advancement of
the science of suicide prevention.
The federal government has made a good start on the problem of suicide, but
the effort will not go far without support from the public and without funding
from the Congress and the state legislatures. Nor is major success at suicide
prevention a realistic goal if treatment for mental illness remains unaffordable
and out of the reach of millions of Americans because health insurance is poor or
nonexistent; if hospital stays for the severely mentally ill are limited to days,
rather than weeks; or if society continues to be unaware of the suffering of so
many people in its midst. Streets and jails are no places for the mentally ill.
The challenges to policy remain substantial. But increasing numbers of
successful approaches promise important gains for directed public action. Much
remains to be learned about how to prevent suicide. But, as the Surgeon
General’s report convincingly argues, much can now be done.
SHORTLY BEFORE he killed himself, D.C. Council Chairman John Wilson spoke to the
Mental Health Association about suicide and mental illness in the black

community. “Suicide,” he said, “is the number one killer among young black
people, but we call it gunfire.… We don’t even like to talk about it. We’ve got to
change the way America feels about depression.” He was right, as usual.
I miss John Wilson very much, and I can still hear him saying in his
passionate, inimitable way, “We can’t put it all in God’s hands. God’s busy.”

CHAPTER 10
A Half-Stitched Scar
—THOSE LEFT BEHIND—
… Time does not heal,
It makes a half-stitched scar
That can be broken and again you feel
Grief as total as in its first hour.
—ELIZABETH JENNINGS
SEVERAL MONTHS ago my husband and I were having dinner with an old friend of his, a
psychiatrist, who toward the end of the evening asked me what I was working
on. I told him I was writing a book about suicide, and this, as is not uncommonly
the case, seemed to unbell the cat. A short silence followed. Then he said, with
the remarkable certainty of someone whose thin understanding of suicide is
belied by thirty years of private practice, “I was suicidal once, when I was
eighteen. But I decided I couldn’t commit suicide because it would be so terrible
for my family and friends. I certainly couldn’t now. I’m a doctor. Think what it
would be like for my patients. How incredibly selfish!” A slight sense of moral
superiority hung in the air.
I kicked my husband’s shins under the table to encourage him to ask for the
bill, and then I reminded his friend, who knew it well, that I had tried years
earlier to kill myself, and nearly died in the attempt, but did not consider it either
a selfish or a not-selfish thing to have done. It was simply the end of what I
could bear, the last afternoon of having to imagine waking up the next morning
only to start all over again with a thick mind and black imaginings. It was the
final outcome of a bad disease, a disease it seemed to me I would never get the
better of. No amount of love from or for other people—and there was a lot—
could help. No advantage of a caring family and fabulous job was enough to
overcome the pain and hopelessness I felt; no passionate or romantic love,
however strong, could make a difference. Nothing alive and warm could make
its way in through my carapace. I knew my life to be a shambles, and I believed

—incontestably—that my family, friends, and patients would be better off
without me. There wasn’t much of me left anymore, anyway, and I thought my
death would free up the wasted energies and well-meant efforts that were being
wasted in my behalf.
All of what our colleague said was true, however. Suicide is awful beyond
expression for those who have to spend their lives with its reality. No one who is
a parent or child, a brother or a sister, a friend, a doctor or a patient would say
otherwise. Most would agree with him that it is, on the face of it, a selfish act;
most have yelled in their hearts, if not out loud, “How could you have done this
to me?” All have asked themselves over and over again, and then a thousand
times beyond, Why? What could I have done differently? Why?
The sting of death is always, as Arnold Toynbee writes, “less sharp for the
person who dies than it is for the bereaved survivors.” This is, he said, “the
capital fact about the relation between living and dying. There are two parties to
the suffering that death inflicts; and, in the apportionment of this suffering, the
survivor takes the brunt.”
Those who are left behind in the wake of suicide are left to deal with the guilt
and the anger, to sift the good memories from the bad, and to try to understand
an inexplicable act. Most of all, they are left to miss a parent or child whose life
was threaded to theirs from its very beginning, mourn a spouse whose bed and
love and trust they shared, or grieve the loss of a confidant with whom they
spent long days and evenings of friendship.
How can killing oneself, in the context of other lives, ever be seen as anything
but a highly personal, cruel, and thoughtless act? Yet suicide is tangential to
reason and consideration and is almost always an irrational choice, the
seemingly best way to end the pain, the futility, the voices, or the hopelessness.
Decisions about suicide are not fleeting thoughts that can be willed away in
deference to the best interests of others. Suicide wells up from cumulative
anguish or is hastened by impulse; however much it may be set in or set off by
the outer world, the suicidal mind tends not to mull on the well-being and future
of others. If it does, it conceives for them a brighter future due to the fact that
their lives are rid of an ill, depressed, violent, or psychotic presence. A young
chemist, before committing suicide, put it succinctly: “The question of suicide
and selfishness to close friends and relatives is one that I can’t answer or even
give an opinion on. It is obvious, however, that I have pondered it and decided I
would hurt them less dead than alive.”
SUICIDE IS a death like no other, and those who are left behind to struggle with it

must confront a pain like no other. They are left with the shock and the unending
“what if’s.” They are left with anger and guilt and, now and again, a terrible
sense of relief. They are left to a bank of questions from others, both asked and
unasked, about Why; they are left to the silence of others, who are horrified,
embarrassed, or unable to cobble together a note of condolence, an embrace, or a
comment; and they are left with the assumption by others—and themselves—
that more could have been done.
Family members and friends are, most painfully, left to ask of themselves,
What will I do without him? How can I live without her? A month after his
death, two years ago now, an older woman wrote me a letter that began, “My 21
year old grandson shot and killed himself. We were very close and I loved him
more than life itself. He started treatment too late and wouldn’t take his
medicine.… His death leaves a hole in my heart that can never be filled.” It is
the hole in the heart that is such a terrible thing. Once the shock has abated, the
guilt wrestled with, and peace made, it is the hole in the heart, the missing of the
person, that stays. This suicide shares with other kinds of death.
Although it might seem otherwise, most aspects of bereavement after suicide
are not notably different from the reactions of those who lose members of their
family or friends to death in other ways: to chronic illness, an accident,
homicide. All are hit with shock, denial, anger, depression, intense loneliness,
and a pervasive sense of loss. But a few things intrinsic to suicide set it apart.
Because the death is often sudden and unexpected—though by no means always;
perhaps half of suicides are at least somewhat expected (one person told an
investigator, for example, “When I got the phone call that he had done it, my
first thought was: so this is it.”)—families haven’t the opportunity to become
accustomed to the possibility of death, make amends, or say good-bye.
The initial denial that often accompanies death is frequently compounded by a
denial of the nature of the death. Parents who ultimately accept the loss of a
child may continue to deny that the death was a suicide. This is particularly true
for the parents of young children or adolescents who kill themselves. The
medical examiner for the state of Maryland told me that even if an adolescent
writes a suicide note and dies by hanging or by a gunshot wound to the head,
some parents continue to insist that the death was an accident. (The inevitable
ambiguities involved in overdose deaths, drownings, and single-passenger
automobile accidents make parental acceptance of suicide in these cases even
harder.)
Other matters compound the nightmare: suicide is often violent, which means
that family members either discover or must identify severely mutilated or
damaged bodies; police need to be involved in the death scene, which adds an

additional criminal-like and disquieting element; and insurance investigators, in
whose hands financial futures are held, often make matters worse by intrusive
and offensive questioning. Friends and neighbors may or may not respond to a
suicide death with the same level of consolation and community support that
most other deaths command, and in fact, one-third of family members report
they felt stigmatized by suicide.
Guilt is a usual and corrosive presence after suicide: parents, siblings,
children, husbands, wives, friends, colleagues, and the most casual of
acquaintances remember and ruminate on all things done and left undone: the
arguments, the slights, the unreturned telephone calls, the doctor not notified, the
guns or drugs not removed from the house, the psychiatric hospitalization
postponed or resisted. Many suicides occur in an already highly stressed and
fragile personal world, a world fraught with anxiety, frayed tempers, overdrawn
bank accounts, and ill will. Persistent psychiatric illness is not kind to those who
have it, nor is it kind to those who must live with those who have it. Anger,
mistrust, and agitation are part and parcel of manic-depression, depression,
schizophrenia, and alcohol and drug abuse. However great the love may have
been for the person who commits suicide, it is likely that the most sustaining
relationships were, at the time of death, frazzled, drained, or severed entirely.
The absolute hopelessness of suicidal depression is, by its nature, contagious,
and it renders those who would help impotent to do so. By the time suicide
occurs, those who kill themselves may resemble only slightly children or
spouses once greatly loved and enjoyed for their company. It is a chilling, but
not surprising, reality that one in ten family members admits relief that suicide
has brought to an end the agony for all concerned. In one study, parents whose
children had died in accidents were compared with parents whose children had
killed themselves. Both groups of parents were asked, among other things, if the
children’s deaths had brought any unexpected benefits to the family:
An equal number of parents from both the suicide and accident groups
said that the death did have a positive impact on their families. Those
from the accident group felt that the suffering had brought the family
closer together. Parents in the suicide group believed that the positive
effect was due to the calm that came back into their lives from not
having to worry all the time. This was mostly the experience of
families who had a son, suffering from mental illness or substance
abuse, which had caused great stress and tension within the family.
The suicide, as painful as it might be for all the family members, was
perceived as a relief from all the difficulties and suffering for

themselves and their son.
Death by suicide is not a gentle deathbed gathering: it rips apart lives and
beliefs, and it sets its survivors on a prolonged and devastating journey. The core
of this journey has been described as an agonizing questioning, a tendency to ask
repeatedly why the suicide occurred and what its meaning should be for those
who are left. One parent explained to a researcher, “I’d wake up at night
envisioning it—him sitting there with a gun to his head. And then I’d wake up a
lot trying to get an answer or figure out what was going through his head when
he was doing this.” Another said simply, “The thoughts are always there, you
know. You wake up and wonder ‘why?’ ”
Parents of children who commit suicide are left particularly devastated. For
months, if not years, they are overwhelmed not only by the loss of a child but by
guilt as well: a sense of having failed the child at the most critical time of his
life, of being insensitive to the extent of his pain, or of overlooking final cues.
Many fathers and mothers repeatedly question their competence as parents and
experience a deep sense of shame, as well as anger and guilt. Unbridled terror
that another child might also commit suicide is common, as is overprotectiveness
of the surviving children. Iris Bolton, director of a counseling center in Atlanta
and author of a book about her son’s suicide, writes that after her twenty-year-
old son died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound she was haunted by “Why? Why
wasn’t I home? Why my son?” and felt as though her car had a huge sign on it
reading “My son committed suicide. I am a failure.” She worried, as many
parents do, about the impact of the suicide on her remaining sons and observed
that her husband dealt with his grief far more privately than she did. With a
minister, she started a support group for parents and found in it the beginning of
a life without her son, as well as an acceptance of the fact that she and all parents
of children who kill themselves are “mortally and irrevocably wounded.”
(Mothers in particular are vulnerable to depression after a child’s suicide. One in
five becomes significantly depressed within six months of the death.) She also
observed that mothers and fathers tend to respond to suicide differently:
During the past ten years I have met many mothers and fathers who
have experienced suicide. Most have similar feelings. One difference
between the sexes is that fathers more often talk about the lost future
with the child, while mothers feel that they have lost their present time.
Nancy Hogan, a nurse and grief educator from Illinois, explains this by
saying that, since the father spends much of his time working away
from the home and providing for the future of his children, his loss

comes partly from the fact that he has no future with this child. He had
planned for the child’s graduation or perhaps walking his daughter
down the aisle at her wedding. His work may now have lost its
meaning. The mother may be involved with the day-to-day activities
of the child, such as carpools, organizing clothes, school, basketball
practice, etc. She has lost her “present time” with the deceased child.
The losses are equally painful, but they are different.
In the preface to her book My Son … My Son, Bolton laid out the dilemma that
she and all parents who lose a child to suicide face:
I don’t know why.
I’ll never know why.
I don’t have to know why
I don’t like it.
What I have to do is make a choice
about my living.
Before they get to that point, however, parents go through acute disbelief,
suffering, and bewilderment describable only by them. I am still haunted by the
words of a colleague and friend whose nineteen-year-old son died of a self-
inflicted gunshot wound. An extraordinarily warm, lively, and caring mother and
clinician, she said, still in shock after her son’s death, “I feel like a mother
animal. I keep searching for my baby.”
The impact of a suicide on the lives of brothers and sisters has been almost
entirely ignored in the clinical research literature, an omission made the more
remarkable by the closeness of emotional ties between siblings and the
possibility that they may be more likely to kill themselves because of shared
genes and environment. The surviving children also now share the suffering and
heightened anxieties of devastated parents. Clinically, siblings experience not
only the enormous loss that the death of a brother or sister brings but guilt and a
sense of responsibility as well. The nature of the death lends itself to unkind
speculation and stigmatization by other children and feelings of vulnerability
that this might happen to them as well.
A three-year follow-up study of the siblings of twenty adolescents who died
by suicide found, however, that in general there appeared to be relatively few
long-term adverse psychological consequences to the surviving children. But in
the first six months after the death, depression was common; one in four of the
siblings, in fact, became clinically depressed. Not surprisingly, siblings who had

a family or personal history of a psychiatric disorder were far more likely to
become depressed than those who did not. Younger children—perhaps because
they were more influenced by the life of an older child or perhaps because they
spent more time at home—were more obviously affected than older siblings.
Adolescents, when asked about the impact of a sibling’s suicide, often say they
feel they “grew up quickly” or “matured more rapidly” as the result of the death.
The suicide of an adolescent is often considered to be a newsworthy event,
and when handled in an insensitive or sensationalist manner by the media it can
be a further source of pain and embarrassment to the siblings and parents. Karen
Dunne-Maxim, now the project director for the New Jersey Central Region
Youth Suicide Prevention Project, recalls the horror that she and the rest of her
family felt when the local newspaper reported simply that her sixteen-year-old
brother, Tim, “dove” in front of a commuter train. No information was given
about the rest of his life, which made the manner of his death more important
than the loss of his life. The family asked Newsday, a Long Island newspaper, if
it would include a description of Tim as they had known him, and it did:
He never missed a year on the honor roll. He was editor of the Junior
High yearbook and produced his own antiwar film that was presented
at the Rockville Center Library. He received awards for playing the
cello and had recently been mountain climbing with the Boy Scouts in
Switzerland. He was brilliant and sensitive and the question will
always remain with those who loved him—Why did he die?
Surprisingly little is known not only about the impact of suicide on siblings
but also about its impact on friends. There is next to nothing written about how
close friends and colleagues make sense of or deal with the suicide of someone
they know well or have worked with. Anecdotal and clinical experience suggests
that guilt—How could I have not noticed how depressed he was?; If only I had
called (or written, or dropped by her house); If only I had let his wife or doctor
know—is common, as is denial that suicide was the real cause of death. Most
people know little about suicide or the psychiatric illnesses most closely
associated with it and therefore flail about, trying to make sense of an often
senseless act. They inevitably focus on the events of life—broken or difficult
relationships, financial concerns, job-related stress—as the reasons for suicide.
In some instances, employers use the occasion to educate the surviving staff
about the most common causes of suicide and provide information about
depression and how to obtain help if it is necessary, but this, unfortunately, is
unusual. More commonly, the cause of death is skirted around or not discussed,

and speculation outstrips accurate information and compassion.
Denial of suicide by family members can make a bad situation even worse for
friends and fellow workers. A colleague of mine, an eminent scientist who
suffered from manic-depressive illness, killed himself a few years ago. His wife,
understandably distraught, refused to believe that he had committed suicide. She
made it clear that suicide was not to be mentioned at his funeral or memorial
service and, unknowingly, made it very hard for his fellow professors, graduate
students, and laboratory staff to deal with his death and move on with their lives.
Even a year later, his students and colleagues found it difficult to discuss the
suicide of this intense, imaginative, and charismatic man. One of his students
said, “He was larger than life. He gave all of us life and joy in our work; his
enthusiasm filled the lab. I’m finally getting back to my experiments, but it all
seems grayer now. I still believe I ought to have been able to save him. He would
have done as much for me.” The student paused for a long time, trying not to cry,
and then said, “But I guess he didn’t, did he?”
THE SUICIDE of a husband or wife brings with it all the intensity and complexity of
marriage, and the loss is inevitably shaded not just by the closeness of the
relationship but by whatever arguments, physical violence, financial strains, and
emotional withdrawal may have been imposed on it by psychiatric illness or
drug or alcohol abuse. Preexisting marital problems or separations generally
worsen the already powerful sense of guilt or responsibility the surviving spouse
feels. To the person who has shared a suicide’s bed or borne his children, the
decision to commit suicide is a particularly personal rejection. And because
suicide is usually seen by others as a preventable or avoidable death, spouses
often bear the brunt of community gossip and family blame. The inevitable
involvements with the police immediately following death, with the not-so-
subtle awareness of murder having to be ruled out, do not improve the situation.
If, as is frequently the case, there has been a prolonged history of severe
mental illness in the spouse who commits suicide, the toll it has taken on the
marriage—in anger, resentment, sexual infidelity, hopelessness, physical and
verbal abuse, or estrangement—will cause some spouses to feel, in addition to
their despair, an unnerving sense of relief. One husband’s immediate reaction
after the suicide of his wife, who had suffered from recurrent depression for
twelve years, reflects this ambivalence: “I had the strange feeling of being three
persons,” he said. “One was the person in shock. The second person felt a
strange sense of relief: no more psychiatrists, pills, shock therapy and hospitals.
A third person witnessed the other two: ‘Look at that fool weeping and yelling,

and look at the other fool already experiencing relief after twelve years of
sympathetic suffering.’ ”
Although the spouses of those who commit suicide experience sharper guilt
and a stronger sense of being blamed for the death than do spouses whose
husbands or wives die in accidents (even though they, too, have been widowed
under sudden and unexpected circumstances), most research finds that the long-
term psychological outcome is similar for both groups. An ultimately good
adjustment is made by the majority of surviving spouses, especially by those
who are young. Most go through an initial period of depression after the suicide
but then go on to remarry and bring up their children with less difficulty than
might be imagined. Less difficulty does not mean no difficulty, however, and the
healing is exceedingly hard and takes a very long time.
Josephine Pesaresi, a social worker in New Jersey, was left a widow with three
children aged ten, fifteen, and sixteen after her husband, a psychiatrist, died of a
self-inflicted gunshot wound during a severe, agitated depression. She describes
the days and months that followed:
From the first moment, people wanted to know why. Why? Why? God,
how I came to hate that question. I was somehow expected to be able
to explain a happening that had just torn the heart out of me. The
stigma, the awful stigma that is associated with suicide, compounded
the excruciating pain we were experiencing.…
As the realization of the loss began to set in, so too did the guilt and
blame. I blamed myself for not realizing the depth of my husband’s
suffering and for not hospitalizing him. Our children felt guilt about
their relationship with him. Our son was in the middle of adolescence
and had been arguing with his father. Our older daughter said she had
sensed disaster and should have followed her instincts to stay close to
her father that day instead of going swimming. Our younger daughter
felt she should not have left the room where her father was to listen to
a tape in her room.
The guilt and “if onlys” escalated and seemed to be endless,
especially for me. My husband’s parents, who were very close to us
before the suicide, blamed me for my husband’s depression and
refused to enter our home.…
After my husband’s death, my children and I had an unspoken
contract. If I would crawl out of my hole, put on some clothes, shop
for food, and drive them to their activities and school, they, too, would

continue with their lives as best they could. However, I had to keep my
end of the bargain—no fudging and no substitute mothers. We were all
hurting, but if any of us were going to do it, we were going to do it
together. They drove a hard bargain with me. It was torture, and they
made me furious, but I got in that damned car and they did too. I knew
that my husband had left me with the unfinished job of raising three
children conceived in love and commitment. Somehow we would get
each other through—and we did. Humor even began to creep back into
our lives. Our older daughter gave me a plaque to keep by my bed
which said, “Shall we call in a consultant or louse it up ourselves?”
Children, although devastated and permanently marked by the suicide of a
parent, for the most part survive the death without severe or enduring pathology.
Like adults in the wake of suicide, however, many children experience profound
grief, guilt, and anxiety that can persist for many months, if not years. In some
instances, particularly if the child has a history of psychiatric disturbance, the
reaction may be severe and long-lasting. An eleven-year-old boy, for instance,
was evaluated at a clinic approximately one year after his father’s suicide: “This
thin, wan, passive boy appeared withdrawn, apathetic, lifeless,” the admitting
doctor wrote. “He hung his head, staring at the floor out of unseeing eyes.
Greatly preoccupied, he rarely initiated any remark, was painfully slow to
respond. His gestures were of utter resignation and defeat, although occasionally
he picked at his arm and lip. When he spoke it was of his immense loneliness,
his guilt regarding his father’s suicide, his inability to be of help to his family
following the suicide, and his own worthlessness.”
The initial communication, or lack of communication, about the
circumstances of a parent’s death can be critical to a child’s ability to accept and
deal with suicide. The range in sensitivity of the surviving parent may be great,
as a study conducted in Britain points out: on the one hand, a father told his sons,
“Mummy was very depressed, unhappy and tired and so took her own life by
taking too many tablets”; at the other extreme, one mother said to her three-year-
old, “The silly fool’s gone and put his head in the gas oven.” Josephine Pesaresi,
the social worker whose husband, a psychiatrist, shot himself, told her children,
within minutes of his death, “He had a sickness that was like a cancer which
could not be cured.”
It is important that children be told the truth as completely and quickly as they
are able to take it in. Efforts to “protect” or “shield” a child almost invariably
come back to haunt him or her by creating a web of distortions and
misperceptions and a “conspiracy of silence.” The true circumstances of death, if

hidden, may in any event be quickly revealed by conversations with other
children or overheard remarks between adults. Learning the truth later rather
than sooner can be an additional and unnecessary damage, and one that prevents
the child from understanding the reality of his own or his parent’s experience.
Television writer and director Christopher Lukas, whose mother, grandmother,
uncle, aunt, and brother (the writer Anthony Lukas) committed suicide,
discusses the conspiracy of silence and dishonesty surrounding his mother’s
death in his book Silent Grief, written with psychologist Henry Seiden:
On a hot August afternoon in 1941, when I was six years old, and she
was thirty-three, my mother walked out of her psychiatrist’s house in
Connecticut, stepped into the garden, and cut her throat. My father, a
successful lawyer—though an unhappy man—was summoned from
his New York office to deal with the death. Also at the psychiatrist’s
house that day was my grandmother. She had been taking my mother
to the psychiatrist that summer; the visits were the culmination of
years of manic-depressive bouts. There was some disagreement
between my mother’s mother and my father on what to tell the
children—me at home, and my eight-year-old brother, away at camp.
My father won the argument: For ten years the nature of my mother’s
death was kept a secret from us, though all our relatives and most of
their friends knew that she had committed suicide.
When I was finally told the truth, at the age of sixteen, my father
and I were sitting in a railroad station on another hot August day. I was
about to catch a train, and I have always believed that my father chose
that moment to tell me because he could not bear to hold a prolonged
conversation on the subject. “Why?” I querulously inquired. “She was
sick,” my father replied, making it clear that was all he had to say on
the subject. We didn’t talk about it again for many years.
Joshua Logan, director and writer of the films Mister Roberts, Picnic, South
Pacific, Bus Stop, and Sayonara, suffered from manic-depressive illness much of
his adult life. Following one of his hospitalizations, he made an appointment to
see a new psychiatrist and started to recite his childhood history:
In discussing my childhood I heard myself saying, almost as if by rote,
“My father died of pneumonia in a hospital in Chicago when I was
three years old.”
After a slight pause, Dr. Moore said quietly, “Your father cut his

throat with a pocket knife in a sanatorium in Chicago. I think it’s about
time you knew that, Mr. Logan.”
I was so astounded that I asked him to repeat the statement three or
four times, and then demanded to know how he could know facts I had
never heard of in my life.…
I couldn’t wait to leave Dr. Moore’s office and took a taxi to my
apartment, where I rushed to call my Uncle Will in Louisiana.
“Yes, Josh,” said Will, “it’s true.”
“But,” I said, “they always told me he died of pneumonia.”
“He did die of pneumonia. It was the blood from his throat that went
into his lungs.”
“But why didn’t anyone tell me? Why didn’t my mother tell me?”
“She never wanted you to know, Josh. I can’t tell you why, except I
imagine she thought it would be too painful for you.”
“It’s not painful, Will, it’s a relief, because at last I know the truth.
The boil has been lanced and the sore is clean. In fact, I’m feeling
better than I have in a very long time. Now I know my father, and for
the first time in my life. I feel close to him for the first time. He must
have been very much like me.”
“He was,” said Will. “Very much. And I hope you won’t tell your
mother you know.”
For some, like Joshua Logan, the truth about his father’s suicide came as a
relief and helped him make sense of both his father and himself. Others remain
haunted by the thought of suicide, obsessed by their parent’s violent end, and
fearful of what it means to their own lives. John Berryman, who like his father
and his father’s sister killed himself, wrote in his poem “Of Suicide”:
“Reflexions on suicide, & on my father possess me / … Of suicide I continually
think.” In a poem written after Ernest Hemingway’s suicide he said, “Save us
from shotguns & father’s suicides / … Mercy! my father; do not pull the trigger /
or all my life I’ll suffer from your anger / killing what you began.” But his most
powerful statement on his father’s suicide was in yet another poem from The
Dream Songs:
The marker slants, flowerless, day’s almost done,
I stand above my father’s grave with rage,
often, often before

I’ve made this awful pilgrimage to one
who cannot visit me, who tore his page
out: I come back for more,
I spit upon this dreadful banker’s grave
who shot his heart out in a Florida dawn
HOW DO PEOPLE survive such impassable grief and rage? How do they keep from being
so destroyed by guilt and sorrow that they sacrifice the remainder of their own
lives for the one lost earlier to suicide? There are many ways: the support of
family and friends, religious faith, the passage of time, psychotherapy, or
counseling, but one of the most effective has been through the establishment of
self-help groups for those who have survived another’s suicide. The American
Foundation for Suicide Prevention and the American Association of Suicidology
are the major national organizations in the United States that offer, in addition to
scientific, advocacy, and education programs, a wide network of local support
groups. These groups allow those who have been through the suicide of a friend
or family member to get together and exchange support, information, and
encouragement about carving out a meaningful future. Listening to others who
have survived kindred straits and eventually helping newer members to do the
same is invaluable in learning to survive and do well with life. Many of the
suicide survivors go on to become actively involved in school and church
education programs, hoping to raise awareness about suicide and the psychiatric
illnesses that can lead to it. Others work at the state and national level to change
legislation or to increase funding for suicide prevention programs and related
research. All try to redeem some good from the awfulness they have known; and
most succeed.
Still, most are left to ask why it happened. Scottish writer Lewis Grassic
Gibbon, who himself attempted suicide when he was a young man, writes of this
in Sunset Song, the first book in his trilogy A Scots Quair. He describes the
struggles of his protagonist, Chris Guthrie, in trying to come to terms with her
mother’s suicide:
Just as the last time she’d climbed to the loch: and when had that
been? She opened her eyes and thought, and tired from that and closed
down her eyes again and gave a queer laugh. The June of last year it
had been, the day when mother had poisoned herself and the twins.
So long as that and so near as that, you’d thought of the hours and
days as a dark, cold pit you’d never escape. But you’d escaped, the

black damp went out of the sunshine and the world went on, the white
faces and whispering ceased from the pit, you’d never be the same
again, but the world went on and you went with it. It was not mother
only that died with the twins, something died in your heart and went
down with her to lie in Kinraddie kirkyard—the child in your heart
died then, the bairn that believed the hills were made for its play, every
road set fair with its warning posts, hands ready to snatch you back
from the brink of danger when the play grew over-rough. That died,
and the Chris of the books and the dreams died with it, or you folded
them up in their paper of tissue and laid them away by the dark, quiet
corpse that was your childhood.…
Then Mistress Munro washed down the body that was mother’s and
put it in a nightgown, her best, the one with blue ribbons on it that she
hadn’t worn for many a year; and fair she made her and sweet to look
at, the tears came at last when you saw her so, hot tears wrung from
your eyes like drops of blood. But they ended quick, you would die if
you wept like that for long, in place of tears a long wail clamoured
endless, unanswered inside your head Oh, mother, mother, why did you
do it?

EPILOGUE
I was naive to underestimate how disturbing it would be to write this book. I
knew, of course, that it would mean interviewing people about the most painful
and private moments of their lives, and I also knew that I would inevitably be
drawn into my own private dealings with suicide over the years. Neither
prospect was an attractive one, but I wanted to do something about the untolled
epidemic of suicide and the only thing I knew to do was to write a book about it.
I am by temperament an optimist, and I thought from the beginning that there
was much to be written about suicide that was strangely heartening.
As a clinician, I believed there were treatments that could save lives; as one
surrounded by scientists whose explorations of the brain are elegant and
profound, I believed our basic understanding of its biology was radically
changing how we think about both mental illness and suicide; and as a teacher
of young doctors and graduate students, I felt the future held out great promise
for the intelligent and compassionate care of the suicidal mentally ill.
All of these things I still believe. Indeed, I believe them more strongly than I
did when I first began doing the background research for this book two years
ago. The science is of the first water; it is fast-paced, and it is laying down, pixel
by pixel, gene by gene, the dendritic mosaic of the brain. Psychologists are
deciphering the motivations for suicide and piecing together the final straws—
the circumstances of life—that so dangerously ignite the brain’s vulnerabilities.
And throughout the world, from Scandinavia to Australia, public health officials
are mapping a clearly reasoned strategy to cut the death rate of suicide.
Still, the effort seems unhurried. Every seventeen minutes in America,
someone commits suicide: Where is the public concern and outrage? I have
become more impatient as a result of writing this book and am more acutely
aware of the problems that stand in the way of denting the death count. I cannot
rid my mind of the desolation, confusion, and guilt I have seen in the parents,
children, friends, and colleagues of those who kill themselves. Nor can I shut out
the images of the autopsy photographs of twelve-year-old children or the prom
photographs of adolescents who within a year’s time will put a pistol in their
mouths or jump from the top floor of a university dormitory building. Looking at
suicide—the sheer numbers, the pain leading up to it, and the suffering left
behind—is harrowing. For every moment of exuberance in the science, or in the

success of governments, there is a matching and terrible reality of the deaths
themselves: the young deaths, the violent deaths, the unnecessary deaths.
Like many of my colleagues who study suicide, I have seen time and again the
limitations of our science, been privileged to see how good some doctors are and
appalled by the callousness and incompetence of others. Mostly, I have been
impressed by how little value our society puts on saving the lives of those who
are in such despair as to want to end them. It is a societal illusion that suicide is
rare. It is not. Certainly the mental illnesses most closely tied to suicide are not
rare. They are common conditions, and, unlike cancer and heart disease, they
disproportionately affect and kill the young.
A FEW WEEKS after I nearly died from a suicide attempt, I went to the
Episcopal church across the street from the UCLA campus. I was a parishioner
there, however occasional, and in light of being able to walk in through the door
instead of being carried in by six, I thought I would see what was left of my
relationship with God. To make it easier, I purchased a ticket to a Bach recital
that was being performed in the chapel. I went to the church early; my mind was
still dull, and everything in it and in my heart was frayed and exhausted. But I
knelt anyway, in spite or because of this, and spoke into my hands the only
prayer I really know or care very much about. The beginning was rote and easy:
“God be in my head, and in my understanding,” I said to myself or God, “God
be in mine eyes, and in my looking.” Somehow, despite the thickening of my
mind, I got through most of the rest of it. But then I blanked out entirely as I got
to the end, struggling to get through what had started as an act of reconciliation
with God. The words were nowhere to be found.
I imagined for a while that my forgetting was due to the remnants of the
poisonous quantities of lithium I had taken, but suddenly the final lines came up
into my consciousness: “God be at mine end, and at my departing.” I felt a
convulsive sense of shame and sadness, a kind I had not known before, nor have
I known it since. Where had God been? I could not answer the question then, nor
can I answer it now. I do know, however, that I should have been dead but was
not—and that I was fortunate enough to be given another chance at life, which
many others were not.
While writing this book, I kept on my desk a photograph and a fragment of a
poem. The photograph is of a young, good-looking cadet at the Air Force
Academy, standing next to a jet fighter. Writing about this young man’s suicide

was perhaps the most difficult part of writing this book. I started the essay on a
clear winter day in the library at the University of St. Andrews in Scotland,
where I teach for a few weeks each year. I was able to read his medical records
only for brief periods before I had to get up, walk over to the window, and look
out at the North Sea in a futile attempt to pull from it a meaning that would make
more tolerable the awfulness of it all. I would then return to the medical notes
that charted out the inexorable course of the illness that would kill him. The
photograph at first haunted, then consoled me; I found great pleasure in
knowing Drew Sopirak.
The fragment of the poem I kept on my desk was one that drew me to life. It is
the last line from Douglas Dunn’s “Disenchantments”:
Look to the living, love them, and hold on.

Appendix
Notes
Acknowledgments

Appendix
RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION ABOUT SUICIDE,
MENTAL ILLNESS, AND ALCOHOL AND
DRUG ABUSE
American Association of Suicidology
4201 Connecticut Avenue, N.W., Suite 408
Washington, DC 20008
(202) 237-2280
Fax: (202) 237-2282
www.suicidology.org
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention
120 Wall Street, 22nd Floor
New York, NY 10005
(888) 333-2377 
Fax: (212) 363-6237 
www.afsp.org
Anxiety Disorders Association of America
(301) 231-9350 
Fax: (301) 231-7392 
www.adaa.org
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
National Center for Injury Control and Prevention 
www.cdc.gov/ncipc
Child and Adolescent Bipolar Foundation

www.cabf.org
Depression and Related Affective Disorders Association
The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Meyer 3-181
600 North Wolfe Street
Baltimore, MD 21287 
(410) 955-4647 
Fax: (410) 614-3241 
www.med.jhu.edu/drada
Health Resources and Services Administration
www.hrsa.dhhs.gov
National Alliance for Research on Schizophrenia and Depression
60 Cutter Mill Road, Suite 404
Great Neck, NY 11021
(516) 829-0091 
Fax: (516) 487-6930 
www.mhsource.com/narsdad.html
National Alliance for the Mentally Ill
200 North Glebe Road, Suite 1015
Arlington, VA 22203
Help line: (800) 950-6264
Front desk: (703) 524-7600 
Fax: (703) 524-9094 
www.nami.org
National Depressive and Manic-Depressive Association
730 North Franklin Street, Suite 501
Chicago, IL 60610
(800) 826-3632 
Fax: (312) 642-7243 

www.ndmda.org
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
6000 Executive Boulevard, Willco Building
Bethesda, MD 20892 
www.niaaa.nih.gov
National Institute of Mental Health
6001 Executive Boulevard
Bethesda, MD 20892
(800) 421-4211 
www.nimh.nih.gov
National Institute of Mental Health Suicide Research Consortium
www.nimh.nih.gov/research/suicide.htm
National Institute on Drug Abuse
6001 Executive Boulevard
Bethesda, MD 20892
(800) 644-6432 
www.nida.nih.gov
National Mental Health Association
1201 Prince Street
Alexandria, VA 22314
(800) 969-6642 
Fax: (703) 684-5968 
www.nmha.org
National Mental Illness Screening Project
One Washington Street, Suite 304
Wellesley Hills, MA 02481

(800) 573-4433 (Depression Screening) 
Fax: (781) 431-7447 
www.nmisp.org
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
www.samhsa.gov
Suicide Prevention Advocacy Network
5034 Odin’s Way
Marietta, GA 30068
(888) 649-1366
Fax: (770) 642-1419 
www.spanusa.org
Surgeon General of the United States
www.surgeongeneral.gov

Notes
I • DEATH LIES NEAR AT HAND
1 “A tiny blade”: Seneca, “To Lucilius: On Providence.” Seneca (4 b.c.–a.d.
65), Roman statesman and philosopher, was forced to take his own life after
having been accused of conspiracy by Nero, emperor of Rome. Three years
later Nero, too, was forced to commit suicide.
2 The Cro-Magnons, we believe: W. F. Allman, The Stone Age Present:
How Evolution Has Shaped Modern Life—From Sex, Violence, and
Language to Emotions, Morals, and Communities (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1994); Ian Tattersall, Becoming Human: Evolution and Human
Uniqueness (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1998).
3 and the hunting apes: B. B. Beck, Animal Tool Behavior (New York:
Garland Press, 1980); W. C. McGrew, Chimpanzee Material Culture
(Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1992); R. Byrne, The
Thinking Ape: Evolutionary Origins of Intelligence (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1995).
4 Several—for example, the Eskimo: S. Bromberg and C. K. Cassel,
“Suicide in the Elderly: The Limits of Paternalism,” Journal of the
American Geriatrics Society, 31 (1983): 698–703.
5 Among the Yuit Eskimos: A. H. Leighton and C. C. Hughes, “Notes on
Eskimo Patterns of Suicide,” Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 11
(1955): 327–338.
6 Most of these deaths: G. Rosen, “History in the Study of Suicide,”
Psychological Medicine, 1 (1971): 267–285; T. J. Marzen, M. K. O’Dowd,
D. Crone, and T. J. Balch, “Suicide: A Constitutional Right?” Duquesne
Law Review, 24 (1985), 1–242; Anton van Hooff, From Autothanasia to
Suicide: Self-Killing in Classical Antiquity (London: Routledge, 1990); M.
Crone, “Historical Attitudes Toward Suicide,” Duquesne Law Review
(Special Issue: A Symposium on Physician-Assisted Suicide), 35 (1996), 7–
42.
7 Gladiators thrust wooden sticks: Seneca, “On the Proper Time to Slip the
Cable,” Epistulae Morales, vol. 4, trans. R. M. Gummere (Cambridge,

Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967).
8 The Catholic Church: Charles Moore, A Full Inquiry Into the Subject of
Suicide, vol. 1 (London: Rivington, 1790), pp. 306–325; George Rosen,
“History in the Study of Suicide.”
9 St. Augustine: St. Augustine, The City of God, trans. Marcus Dods, vol. 1,
(New York: Hafner, 1948) Book 1, pp. 31–39. For an excellent recent
history of suicide in western culture, see G. Minois, History of Suicide:
Voluntary Death in Western Culture, trans. L. G. Cochrane (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins, 1999).
10 so as “not to bury the wicked”: H. Cohn, “Suicide in Jewish Legal and
Religious Tradition,” Mental Health and Society, 3 (1976): 129–136, p.
136.
11 The Semachot: D. M. Posner, “Suicide and the Jewish Tradition,” in E.
J. Dunne, J. L. McIntosh, and K. Dunne-Maxim, eds., Suicide and Its
Aftermath (New York: W. W. Norton, 1987), pp. 159–162. The Semachot is
quoted on p. 160.
12 “The general rule”: Cohn, “Suicide in Jewish Legal and Religious
Tradition.”
13 In Islamic law, suicide: Y. Al-Najjar, “Suicide in Islamic Law,” in H.
Winnick and L. Miller, eds., Aspects of Suicide in Modern Civilization
(Jerusalem: Academic Press, 1978), pp. 28–33.
14 “keep the corpses down”: C. Gittings, Death, Burial and the Individual
in Early Modern England (London: Routledge, 1988).
15 In early Massachusets,: Howard I. Kushner, American Suicide: A
Psychocultural Exploration (New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University
Press, 1991).
16 they then sank his body: P. V. Glob, The Bog People: Iron-Age Man
Preserved, trans. Rupert Bruce-Mitford (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University
Press, 1988), pp. 148–151.
17 “The deceased was washed”: K. A. Achte and J. Lönnqvist, “Death and
Suicide in Finnish Mythology and Folklore,” in N. Speyer, R. F. W.
Diekstra, and K. J. M. van de Loo, eds., Proceedings of the International
Conference for Suicide Prevention (Amsterdam; Swets & Zeitlinger, 1973),
pp. 317–323, p. 321.
18 In France, the body: G. Rosen, “History in the Study of Suicide.”
19 In parts of Germany: Henry Romilly Fedden, Suicide: A Social and

Historical Study (London: Peter Davies, 1938), p. 37.
20 Early Norwegian laws: Nils Retterstol, Suicide: A European Perspective
(Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1993), p. 20.
21 “an irreparable deed”: Ibid., p. 21.
22 “individual submission to Satan”: Kushner, American Suicide.
23 “gibbeted and … left to rot”: Mark Williams, Cry of Pain:
Understanding Suicide and Self-Harm (London: Penguin, 1997).
24 Rather than suffering: Ibid.
25 “Whensoever any affliction”: John Donne, Biathanatos. A modern-
spelling edition with introduction and comment by Michael Rudick and M.
Pabst Battin (New York: Garland, 1982), p. 39.
26 Two recent authors: Williams, Cry of Pain; Kushner, American Suicide.
Roy Porter’s Mind-Forg’d Manacles: A History of Madness in England
from the Restoration to the Regency (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1987) is also an excellent historical account of suicide.
27 in mid-seventeenth-century England: Williams, Cry of Pain.
28 the Boston Coroners’ Juries made: Kushner, American Suicide.
29 Dorothy Bradford … “accidentally fell overboard”: Samuel Eliot
Morison, Introduction to William Bradford, Of Plymouth Plantation: 1620–
1647 (New York; Alfred A. Knopf, 1996), p. xxiv.
30 Bradford himself does not mention: Bradford, ibid.
31 Most European countries formally decriminalized: J. Neeleman,
“Suicide as a Crime in the U.K.: Legal History, International Comparisons
and Present Implications,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 94 (1996):
252–257.
32 “I am the resurrection and the life”: The Book of Common Prayer
(Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 394–395.
33 the Order for the Burial of the Dead: Ibid., p. 388.
34 “desperately sensitive and confused”: A. Alvarez, “Literature in the
Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries,” in S. Perlin, ed., A Handbook for the
Understanding of Suicide (Northvale, N.J.: Jason Aronson, 1975), p. 59.
35 “Judging whether life”: A. Camus, The Myth of Sisyphus and Other
Essays (New York: Vintage, 1995), p. 3.
36 Study after study has shown: R. M. A. Hirschfeld and G. L. Klerman,
“Treatment of Depression in the Elderly,” Geriatrics, 127 (1979): 51–57; B.

D. Lebowitz, J. L. Pearson, L.S. Schneider, et al., “Diagnosis and Treatment
of Depression in Late Life: Consensus Statement Update,” Journal of the
American Medical Association, 278 (1997), 1186–1190.
37 suicide rates in the elderly are alarmingly high: Y. Conwell, R. Melanie,
and E. D. Caine, “Completed Suicide at Age 50 and Over,” Journal of the
American Geriatric Society, 38 (1990: 640–644; N. J. Osgood, Suicide in
Later Life (New York: Lexington Books, 1992); D. C. Clark, “Narcissistic
Crises of Aging and Suicidal Despair,” Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behavior, 23 (1993): 21–26; M. M. Henriksson, M. J. Marttunen, E. T.
Isometsä, et al., “Mental Disorders in Elderly Suicide,” International
Psychogeriatrics, 7 (1995): 275–286; Y. Conwell, P. R. Duberstein, C. Cox,
et al., “Relationships of Age and Axis I Diagnoses in Victims of Completed
Suicide: A Psychological Autopsy Study,” American Journal of Psychiatry,
153 (1996): 1001–1008; Gary J. Kennedy, ed., Suicide and Depression in
Late Life (New York: John Wiley, 1996); H. Hendin, “Suicide, Assisted
Suicide, and Medical Illness,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 60 (Suppl. 2)
(1999): 46–50.
38 physician-assisted suicide: For thoughtful but opposing discussions of
the subject, see H. Hendin, Seduced by Death: Doctors, Patients and the
Dutch Cure (New York: W. W. Norton, 1997), and C. F. McKhann, A Time
to Die: The Place for Physician Assistance (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1999).
39 Suicide in the young: R. N. Anderson, K. D. Kochanek, and S. L.
Murphy, “Advance Report of Final Mortality Statistics, 1995,” Monthly
Vital Statistics Report, 45 (11) (Suppl. 2) (Hyattsville, Md.: National Center
for Health Statistics, 1997), DHHS Publication No. (PHS) 97–1120.
40 The 1995 National College: Division of Adolescent and School Health,
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion,
“Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance: National College Health Risk Behavior
Survey—United States, 1995,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 46
(1997): No. SS-6.
41 One in five high school students: “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—
United States, 1997,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 47 (1997):
No. SS-3.
42 the same as those reported for high school students: L. Kann, C. W.
Warren, W. A. Harris, J. L. Collins, B. I. Williams, J. G. Ross, and L. J.
Kolbe, “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—United States, 1995,”

Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 45 (1996): No. SS-4; L. Kann, C.
W. Warren, W. A. Harris, J. L. Collins, K. A. Douglas, M. E. Collins, B. I.
Williams, J. G. Ross, and L. J. Kolbe, “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—
United States, 1993,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 44 (1995):
No. SS-1.
43 Data for graph: For Vietnam War deaths: United States Department of
Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information
Operations and Reports, July 1998. For HIV deaths and suicide: R. N.
Anderson, K. D. Kochanek, and S. L. Murphy, “Report of Final Mortality
Statistics, 1995,” Monthly Vital Statistics Report, 45 (11, Suppl. 2)
(Hyattsville, Md.: National Center for Health Statistics, 1997); additional
statistics compiled by Dr. Alex Crosby, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Ga.; Ken Kochanek, M.A., Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (National Center for Health Statistics, Hyattsville, Md.); Dr.
Harry Rosenberg, also at the National Center for Health Statistics.
44 Thirty thousand Americans: L. F. McCraig and B. J. Strussman,
“National Hospital Ambulatory Care Survey: 1996. Emergency Department
Summary Advance Data from Vital and Health Statistics,” no. 293
(Hyattsville, Md.: National Center for Health Statistics, 1997).
45 “There is … in this humour”: Robert Burton, The Anatomy of
Melancholy, vol. 1 (London: J. M. Dent, 1932), pp. 431–432.
2 • TO MEASURE THE HEART’S TURBULENCE
1 “to discover the elusive boundaries”: Henry Romilly Fedden, Suicide: A
Social and Historical Study (London: Peter Davies, 1938), p. 9.
2 The early Greeks: D. Daube, “The Linguistics of Suicide,” Suicide and
Life-Threatening Behavior, 7 (1977): 132–182.
3 Centuries of books: John Donne, Biathanatos (New York: Garland, 1982;
first published 1647); David Hume, Of Suicide (1784, posthumous), in A.
Macintyre, ed., Hume’s Ethical Writings (New York: Macmillan, 1956);
Emile Durkheim, Suicide: A Study in Sociology (New York: Free Press,
1951; first published 1897); Albert Camus, The Myth of Sisyphus and Other
Essays (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1955); J. D. Douglas, The Social
Meanings of Suicide (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1967);
Jacques Choron, Suicide (New York: Scribners, 1972); M. P. Battin and D.
J. Mays, eds., Suicide: The Philosophical Issues (New York: St. Martin’s

Press, 1980); R. Maris, Pathways to Suicide (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1981); Edwin Shneidman, Definition of Suicide (New
York: John Wiley, 1985); Gavin J. Fairbairn, Contemplating Suicide: The
Language and Ethics of Self Harm (London: Routledge, 1995).
4 All suicide classification: A. T. Beck, J. H. Davis, C. J. Frederick, S.
Perlin, A. D. Pokorny, R. E. Schulman, R. H. Seiden, and B. J. Wittlin,
“Classification and Nomenclature,” in H. L. P. Resnick and B. C. Hathorne,
eds., Suicide Prevention in the Seventies (Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1973), pp. 7–12; T. E. Ellis, “Classification of
Suicidal Behavior: A Review and Step Toward Integration,” Suicide and
Life-Threatening Behavior, 18 (1988): 358–371
5 Suicide is defined: M. L. Rosenberg, L. E. Davidson, J. C. Smith, A. L.
Berman, H. Buzbee, G. Ganter, G. A. Gay, B. Moore-Lewis, D. H. Mills, D.
Murray, P. W. O’Carroll, and D. Jobes, “Operational Criteria for the
Determination of Suicide,” Journal of Forensic Sciences, 32 (1988): 1445–
1455; P. W. O’Carroll, A. L. Berman, R. W. Maris, E. K. Moscicki, B. L.
Tanney, and M. M. Silverman, “Beyond the Tower of Babel: A
Nomenclature for Suicide,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 26
(1996): 237–252.
6 The World Health Organization: World Health Organization, Prevention
of Suicide, Public Health Paper No. 35 (Geneva: World Health
Organization, 1968).
7 Legal and financial issues: S. W. Abbott, “Death Certification,” Albert H.
Buck, ed., Reference Handbook of the Medical Sciences, (New York:
William Wood, (1901); Edwin S. Shneidman, Deaths of Man (New York:
Quadrangle, 1973); D. Jacobs and M. Klein-Benheim, “The Psychological
Autopsy: A Useful Tool for Determining Proximate Causation in Suicide
Cases,” Bulletin of the American Academy of Psychiatry and Law, 23
(1995): 165–182.
8 Earlier estimates suggested: L. Dublin, Suicide (New York: Ronald Press,
1963); National Center for Health Statistics, Suicide in the United States,
1950–1964; United States Public Health Service Publication No. 1000,
Series 20:1, Rockville, Md., 1967; J. M. Toolan, “Suicide in Children and
Adolescents,” American Journal of Psychotherapy, 29 (1975): 339–344; R.
E. Litman, “Psychological Aspects of Suicide,” in W. J. Curran, A. L.
McGarry, and C. S. Petty, eds., Modern Legal Medicine: Psychiatry and
Forensic Science (Philadelphia: F. A. Davis, 1980); D. A. Jobes and A. L.

Berman, “Response Biases and the Impact of Psychological Autopsies on
Medical Examiners’ Determination of Mode of Death,” paper presented to
the 17th Meeting of the American Association of Suicidology, Anchorage,
Alaska, 1984.
9 more recent studies indicate: A. B. Ford, N. B. Rushforth, N. Rushforth,
C. S. Hirsch, and L. Adelson, “Violent Death in a Metropolitan County: II.
Changing Patterns in Suicides (1959–1974),” American Journal of Public
Health, 69 (1979): 459–464; D. A. Brent, J. A. Perper, and C. J. Allman,
“Alcohol, Firearms, and Suicide Among the Young,” Journal of the
American Medical Association, 257 (1987): 3369–3372; G. Kleck,
“Miscounting Suicides,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 18 (1988):
219–236; E. K. Moscicki, “Epidemiology of Suicidal Behavior,” Suicide
and Life-Threatening Behavior, 25 (1995): 22–35; A. Ohberg and J.
Lönnqvist, “Suicides Hidden Among Undetermined Deaths,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 98 (1998): 214–218.
10 The evidence may be explicit: D. A. Jobes, A. L. Berman, and A. R.
Josselson, “Improving the Validity and Reliability of Medical-Legal
Certifications of Suicide,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 17
(1987): 310–325, p. 323.
11 In Canadian studies: G. K. Jarvis and H. C. Northcott, “Religion and
Differences in Mortality and Morbidity,” Social Science and Medicine, 25
(1987): 813–824; G. K. Jarvis, M. Boldt, and J. Butt, “Medical Examiners
and Manner of Death,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 21 (1991):
115–133.
12 In one investigation, Danish coroners: M. W. Atkinson, N. Kessel, and J.
B. Dalgaard, “The Comparability of Suicide Rates,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 127 (1975): 247–256.
13 Coroners and medical examiners: B. Walsh, D. Walsh, and B. Whelan,
“Suicide in Dublin: II. The Influence of Some Social and Medical Factors
on Coroners’ Verdicts,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 126 (1975): 309–312;
J. Maxwell Atkinson, Discovering Suicide: Studies in the Social
Organization of Sudden Death (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press,
1978); M. C. Bradley, “Changing Patterns of Suicide in Leeds, 1979 to
1985,” Medical Science Law, 27 (1987): 201–206; M. Speechley and K. M.
Stavraky, “The Adequacy of Suicide Statistics for Use in Epidemiology and
Public Health,” Canadian Journal of Public Health, 82 (1991): 38–42.
14 Indeed, most drownings: T. T. Noguchi, Coroner (New York: Simon and

Schuster, 1983); A. L. Berman, “Forensic Suicidology and the
Psychological Autopsy,” A. A. Leenaars, ed., in Suicidology: Essays in
Honor of Edwin S. Shneidman (Northvale, N.J.: Jason Aronson, 1993), pp.
248–266.
15 “For just as it is difficult”: J. Maxwell Atkinson, Discovering Suicide:
Studies in the Social Organization of Sudden Death (Pittsburgh: University
of Pittsburgh Press, 1978), pp. 124–125.
16 Deaths in single-car accidents: D. P. Phillips and T. E. Ruth, “Adequacy
of Official Suicide Statistics for Scientific Research and Public Policy,”
Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 23 (1993): 307–319; A. Ohberg, A
Penttila, and J. Lönnqvist, “Driver Suicides,” British Journal of Psychiatry,
171 (1997): 468–472.
17 The most important cause: I. M. K. Ovenstone, “A Psychiatric Approach
to the Diagnosis of Suicide and Its Effect upon the Edinburgh Statistics,”
British Journal of Psychiatry, 123 (1973): 15–21; M. W. Atkinson, N.
Kessel, and J. B. Dalgaard, “The Comparability of Suicide Rates,” British
Journal of Psychiatry, 127 (1975): 247–256; B. M. Barraclough,
“Reliability of Violent Death Certification in One Coroner’s District,”
British Journal of Psychiatry, 132 (1978): 39–41; R. E. Litman, “500
Psychological Autopsies,” Journal of Forensic Science, 34 (1989): 638–
646; M. Speechley and K. M. Stavraky, “The Adequacy of Suicide
Statistics for Use in Epidemiology and Public Health,” Canadian Journal of
Public Health, 82 (1991): 38–42; P. N. Cooper and C. M. Milroy, “The
Coroner’s System and Under-reporting of Suicide,” Medical Science Law,
35 (1995), 319–326.
18 Self-poisoning deaths: R. D. T. Farmer, “Assessing the Epidemiology of
Suicide and Parasuicide,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 153 (1988): 16–20.
19 This technique: P. Friedman, “Suicide Among Police: A Study of
Ninety-Three Suicides Among New York City Policemen, 1934–1940,” in
E. S. Shneidman, ed., Essays in Self-Destruction (New York: Science
House, 1967), pp. 414–449.
20 The study, now a classic: E. R. Robins, G. E. Murphy, R. H. Wilkinson,
S. Gassner, and J. Kayes, “Some Clinical Considerations in the Prevention
of Suicide Based on a Study of 134 Successful Suicides,” American Journal
of Public Health, 49 (1959): 888–899; Eli Robins, The Final Months: A
Study of the Lives of 134 Persons Who Committed Suicide (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1981).

21 as a method of clinical: E. S. Shneidman and N. L. Farberow, “Sample
Investigations of Equivocal Deaths,” in N. L. Farberow and E. S.
Shneidman, eds., The Cry for Help (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1961), pp.
118–128; R. E. Litman, T. J. Curphey, E. S. Shneidman, et al.,
“Investigations of Equivocal Suicides,” Journal of the American Medical
Association, 184 (1963): 924–929; T. J. Curphey, “The Forensic Pathologist
and the Multidisciplinary Approach to Death,” in E. S. Shneidman, ed.,
Essays in Self-Destruction (New York: Science House, 1967), pp. 110–117;
E. S. Shneidman, “Suicide, Lethality and the Psychological Autopsy,” E. S.
Shneidman and M. Ortega, eds., Aspects of Depression (Boston: Little,
Brown, 1969).
22 Members of the Suicide Team: The list of inquiry topics is from E. S.
Shneidman, Deaths of Man (Baltimore: Penguin, 1974), p. 135.
23 “In practically any coroner’s office”: N. L. Farberow and E. S.
Shneidman, eds., The Cry for Help (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1965), p.
121.
24 The psychological autopsy: J. Beskow, B. Runeson, and U. Asgard,
“Psychological Autopsies: Methods and Ethics,” Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior, 20 (1990): 307–323; D. C. Clark and S. L. Horton-
Deutsch, “Assessment in Absentia: The Value of the Psychological Autopsy
Method for Studying Antecedents of Suicide and Predicting Future
Suicides,” in R. W. Maris, A. L. Berman, J. T. Maltsberger, and R. I. Yufit,
eds., Assessment and Prevention of Suicide, (New York: Guilford, 1992, pp.
144–181.
25 It has proven especially useful: T. L. Dorpat and H. S. Ripley, “A Study
of Suicide in the Seattle Area,” Comprehensive Psychiatry, 1 (1960): 349–
359; B. M. Barraclough, J. Bunch, B. Nelson, and P. Sainsbury, “A Hundred
Cases of Suicide: Clinical Aspects,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 125
(1974): 355–373; C. L. Rich, D. Young, and R. C. Fowler, “San Diego
Suicide Study: 1. Young Versus Old Subjects,” Archives of General
Psychiatry, 43 (1986): 577–582; D. A. Brent, J. A. Perper, C. E. Goldstein,
D. J. Kolko, M. J. Allan, C. J. Allman, and J. P. Zelenak, “Risk Factors for
Adolescent Suicide: A Comparison of Adolescent Suicide Victims with
Suicidal Inpatients,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 45 (1988): 581–588.
26 These indirect, or “subintentional,”: Edwin Shneidman, Definition of
Suicide (New York: John Wiley, 1985), p. 21.
27 chronic alcohol or drug abuse: Karl Menninger, Man Against Himself

(New York: Harcourt, Brace and Co., 1938); Norman Farberow, ed., The
Many Faces of Suicide (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1980).
28 Twenty-five years ago: E. S. Paykel, J. K. Myers, J. J. Lindenthal, and J.
Tanner, “Suicidal Feelings in the General Population: A Prevalence Study,”
British Journal of Psychiatry, 124 (1974) 460–469.
29 National Institute of Mental Health: Lee N. Robins and Darrel A. Regier,
eds., Psychiatric Disorders in America: The Epidemiologic Catchment Area
Study (New York: Free Press, 1991).
30 Of the 18,500 individuals: E. K. Moscicki, P. O’Carroll, B. Z. Locke, D.
S. Rae, A. G. Roy, and D. A. Regier, “Suicidal Ideation and Attempts: The
Epidemiologic Catchment Area,” in U.S. DHHS, Report of the Secretary’s
Task Force on Youth Suicide: vol. 4, Strategies for the Prevention of Youth
Suicide (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1988); E. K.
Moscicki, “Epidemiologic Surveys as Tools for Studying Suicidal
Behavior: A Review,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 19 (1989):
131–146.
31 Other investigations conducted: J. J. Schwab, G. J. Warheit, and C. E.
Holzer, “Suicidal Ideation and Behaviour in a General Population,”
Diseases of the Nervous System, 33 (1972): 745–749; T. Hällstrom, “Life-
Weariness, Suicidal Thoughts and Suicidal Attempts Among Women in
Gothenburg, Sweden,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 56 (1977): 15–20;
D. S. Vandivort and B. Z. Locke, “Suicide Ideation: Its Relation to
Depression, Suicide, and Suicide Attempt,” Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behavior, 9 (1979): 205–218; E. L. Goldberg, “Depression and Suicide
Ideation in the Young Adult,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 138 (1981):
35–40; R. Ramsay and C. Bagley, “The Prevalence of Suicidal Behaviors,
Attitudes and Associated Social Experiences in an Urban Population,”
Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 15 (1985): 151–167.
32 The most comprehensive study: “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance:
National College Health Risk Behavior Survey—United States, 1995,”
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 46 (1997): No. SS-6.
33 Other research, conducted in Europe: L. E. Craig and R. J. Senter,
“Student Thoughts About Suicide,” Psychological Record, 22 (1972): 355–
358; C. V. Leonard and D. E. Flinn, “Suicidal Ideation and Behavior in
Youthful Nonpsychiatric Populations,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 38 (1972): 366–371; D. C. Murray, “Suicidal and Depressive
Feelings Among College Students,” Psychological Reports, 33 (1973):

175–181; B. L. Mishara, A. H. Baker, and T. T. Mishara, “The Frequency of
Suicide Attempts: A Retrospective Approach Applied to College Students,”
American Journal of Psychiatry, 133 (1976): 841–844; J. L. Bernard and
M. Bernard, “Factors Related to Suicidal Behavior Among College
Students and the Impact of Institutional Response,” Journal of College
Student Personnel, 23 (1982): 409-413; B. L. Mishara, “College Students’
Experience with Suicide and Reactions to Suicidal Verbalizations: A Model
for Prevention.” Journal of Community Psychology, 10 (1982): 142–150;
M. D. Rudd, “The Prevalence of Suicidal Ideation Among College
Students,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 19 (1989): 173–183; P.
W. Meilman, J. A. Pattis, and D. Kraus-Zeilmann, “Suicide Attempts and
Threats on One College Campus: Policy and Practice,” Journal of
American College Health, 42 (1994): 147–154.
34 High school students also: Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—United
States, 1997, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, CDC
Surveillance Summaries, August 14, 1998. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report, 47 (1998): No. SS-3.
35 more than 50 percent of New York: J. M. Harkavy Friedman, G. M.
Asnis, M. Boeck, and J. DiFiore, “Prevalence of Specific Suicidal
Behaviors in a High School Sample,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 144
(1987): 1203-1206.
36 20 percent of Oregon high school: P. M. Lewinsohn, P. Rohde, and J. P.
Seeley, “Adolescent Suicidal Ideation and Attempts: Prevalence, Risk
Factors, and Clinical Implications,” Clinical Psychology: Science and
Practice, 3 (1996): 25–46.
37 One in twenty French boys: M. Choquet and H. Menke, “Suicidal
Thoughts During Early Adolescence: Prevalence, Associated Troubles and
Help-Seeking Behavior,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 81 (1989): 170–
177.
38 In Canada, one in ten: M. Choquet, V. Kovess, and N. Poutignat,
“Suicidal Thoughts Among Adolescents: An Intercultural Approach,”
Adolescence, 28 (1993): 649–659.
39 Another Canadian study: R. T. Joffe, D. R. Offord, and M. H. Boyle,
“Ontario Child Health Study,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 145 (1
988): 1420–1423.
40 it is of further concern: T. M. Achenbach and C. S. Edelbrock, Manual
for the Child Behavior Checklist and Revised Child Behavior Profile

(Burlington: University of Vermont Department of Psychiatry, 1983); T. M.
Achenbach and C. S. Edelbrock, Manual for the Youth Self-Report and
Profile (Burlington: University of Vermont Department of Psychiatry,
1987); J. M. Rey and K. D. Bird, “Sex Differences in Suicidal Behavior of
Referred Adolescents,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 158 (1991): 776–781.
41 Parents also seriously underestimate: D. M. Velting, D. Shaffer, M. S.
Gould, R. Garfinkel, P. Fisher, and M. Davies, “Parent-Victim Agreement
in Adolescent Suicide Research,” Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 37 (1998): 1161–1166.
42 Cynthia Pfeffer: C. R. Pfeffer, “Suicidal Fantasies in Normal Children,”
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 173 (1985): 78–84, p. 80.
43 “One night”: Evelyn Waugh, A Little Learning. The First Volume of an
Autobiography (London: Chapman & Hall, 1964), pp. 229–230.
44 There is, in fact, no consistent: D. J. Pallis and P. Sainsbury, “The Value
of Assessing Intent in Attempted Suicide,” Psychological Medicine, 6
(1976): 487–492; A. S. Henderson, J. Hartigan, J. Davidson, G. N. Lance,
P. Duncan-Jones, K. M. Koller, K. Ritchie, H. McAuley, C. L. Williams,
and W. Slaghuis, “A Typology of Parasuicide,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 131 (1977): 631–641; E. S. Paykel and E. Rassaby,
“Classification of Suicide Attempters by Cluster Analysis,” British Journal
of Psychiatry, 133 (1978): 45–52; S. Henderson and G. N. Lance, “Types of
Attempted Suicide,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 59 (1979): 31–39; K.
Hawton, M. Osborn, J. O’Grady, and D. Cole, “Classification of
Adolescents Who Take Overdoses,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 140
(1982): 124–131; D. J. Pallis, J. S. Gibbons, and D. W. Pierce, “Estimating
Suicide Risk Among Attempted Suicides: II. Efficiency of Predictive Scales
After the Attempt,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 144 (1984): 139–148; D.
A. Brent, “Correlates of the Medical Lethality of Suicide Attempts in
Children and Adolescents,” Journal of the American Academy for Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 26 (1987): 87–89; A. Kurz, H. J. Möller, G.
Baindl, F. Bürk, A Torhorst, C. Wächtler, and H. Lauter, “Classification of
Parasuicide by Cluster Analysis: Types of Suicidal Behaviour, Therapeutic
and Prognostic Implications,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 150 (1987):
520–525; H. Hjelmeland, “Verbally Expressed Intentions of Parasuicide: 1.
Characteristics of Patients with Various Intentions,” Crisis, 16 (1995): 176–
180; E. Arensman and J. F. M. Kerkhof, “Classification of Attempted
Suicide: A Review of Empirical Studies, 1963–1993,” Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior, 26 (1996): 46–65.

45 A Suicide Intent Scale: R. W. Beck, J. B. Morris, and A. T. Beck,
“Cross-Validation of a Suicide Intent Scale,” Psychological Reports, 34
(1974): 445–446.
46 In addition to scales: P. R. McHugh and H. Goodell, “Suicidal Behavior:
A Distinction in Patients with Sedative Poisoning Seen in a General
Hospital,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 25 (1971): 456–464; A. D.
Weisman and J. W. Worden, “Risk-Rescue Rating in Suicide Assessment,”
Archives of General Psychiatry, 26 (1972): 553–560; L. B. Potter, M.
Kresnow, K. E. Powell, Patrick W. O’Carroll, R. K. Lee, R. F. Frankowski,
A. C. Swann, T. L. Bayer, M. H. Bautista, and M. G. Briscoe,
“Identification of Nearly Fatal Suicide Attempts: Self-Inflicted Injury
Severity Form,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 28 (1998): 174–
186.
47 between 1 and 4 percent: J. J. Schwab, G. J. Warheit, and C. E. Holzer,
“Suicide Ideation and Behavior in a General Population,” Diseases of the
Nervous System, 33 (1972): 745–748; E. S. Paykel, J. K. Myers, J. J.
Lindenthal, and J. Tanner, “Suicidal Feelings in the General Population: A
Prevalence Study,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 124 (1974): 460–469; R.
Ramsay and C. Bagley, “The Prevalence of Suicidal Behaviors, Attitudes
and Associated Social Experiences in an Urban Population,” Suicide and
Life-Threatening Behavior, 15 (1985): 151–167; E. K. Moscicki, P.
O’Carroll, D. S. Rae, B. Z. Locke, A. Roy, and D. A. Regier, “Suicide
Attempts in the Epidemiologic Catchment Area Study,” Yale Journal of
Biology and Medicine, 61 (1988): 259–268; J. Hintikka, H. Viinamäki, A.
Tanskanen, O. Kontula, and K. Koskela, “Suicidal Ideation and Parasuicide
in the Finnish General Population,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 98
(1998): 23–27; D. J. Statham, A. C. Heath, P. A. F. Madden, K. K. Bucholz,
L. Bierut, S. H. Dinwiddie, W. S. Slutske, M. P. Dunne, and N. G. Martin,
“Suicidal 
Behaviour: 
An 
Epidemiological 
and 
Genetic 
Study,”
Psychological Medicine, 28 (1998): 839–855; M. M. Weissman, R. C.
Bland, G. J. Canino, S. Greenwald, H.-G. Hwu, P. R. Joyce, E. G. Karam,
C.-K. Lee, J. Lellouch, J.-P. Lepine, S. C. Newman, M. Rubio-Stipec, J. E.
Wells, P. J. Wickramartne, H.-U. Wittchen, and E.-K. Yeh, “Prevalence of
Suicide Ideation and Suicide Attempts in Nine Countries,” Psychological
Medicine, 29 (1999): 9–17.
48 Adolescents, on the other hand: B. L. Mishara, A. H. Baker, and T. T.
Mishara, “The Frequency of Suicide Attempts: A Retrospective Approach
Applied to College Students,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 133 (1976):

841–844; J. M. Harkavy Friedman, G. M. Asnis, M. Boeck, and J. Di Fiore,
“Prevalence of Specific Suicidal Behaviors in a High School Sample,”
American Journal of Psychiatry, 144 (1987): 1203–1206; R. T. Joffe, D. R.
Offord, and M. H. Boyle, “Ontario Child Health Study: Suicidal Behavior
in Youth Age 12–16 Years,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 145 (1988):
1420–1423; M. D. Rudd, “The Prevalence of Suicidal Ideation Among
College Students,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 19 (1989): 173–
183; C. W. M. Kienhorst, E. J. DeWilde, J. van den Bout, R. F. W. Diekstra,
and W. H. G. Wolters, “Characteristics of Suicide Attempters in a
Population-Based Sample of Dutch Adolescents,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 156 (1990): 243–248; P. J. Meehan, J. A. Lamb, L. E. Saltzman,
and P. W. O’Carroll, “Attempted Suicide Among Young Adults: Progress
Toward a Meaningful Estimate of Prevalence,” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 149 (1992): 41–44; P. M. Lewinsohn, P. Rohde, and J. R.
Seeley, “Adolescent Suicidal Ideation and Attempts: Prevalence, Risk
Factors, and Clinical Implications,” Clinical Psychology: Science and
Practice, 3 (1996), 25–46; “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance: National
College Health Risk Behavior Survey—United States, 1995,” Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Report, 46 (1997): No. SS-6; C. Rey Gex, F. Narring,
C. Ferron, and P. A. Michaud, “Suicide Attempts Among Adolescents in
Switzerland: Prevalence, Associated Factors and Comorbidity,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 98 (1998): 28–33; “Youth Risk Behavior
Surveillance—United States, 1997,” Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, CDC Surveillance Summaries, August 14, 1998, Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report, 47 (1998): No. SS-3.
49 Myrna Weissman: M. M. Weissman, “The Epidemiology of Suicide
Attempts, 1960 to 1971,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 30 (1974): 737–
746.
50 There may also be a tendency: R. D. Goldney, S. Smith. A. H.
Winefield, M. Tiggeman, and H. R. Winefield, “Suicidal Ideation: Its
Enduring 
Nature 
and 
Associated 
Morbidity,” 
Acta 
Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 83 (1991): 115–120.
51 There are an estimated: E. S. Shneidman and N. L. Farberow, “Statistical
Comparison Between Attempted and Committed Suicides,” in N. L.
Farberow and E. S. Shneidman, eds., The Cry for Help (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1961), pp. 19–47; E. Stengel, Suicide and Attempted Suicide
(Baltimore: Penguin, 1964); D. Parkin and E. Stengel, “Incidence of
Suicidal Attempts in an Urban Community,” British Medical Journal, 2

(1965): 133–138; I. M. K. Ovenstone, “Spectrum of Suicidal Behaviours in
Edinburgh,” British Journal of Preventive and Social Medicine, 27 (1973):
27–35; M. McIntire, C. R. Angle, R. L. Wikoff, and M. L. Schlicht,
“Recurrent Adolescent Suicidal Behavior,” Pediatrics, 60 (1977): 605–608;
K. R. Petronis, J. F. Samuels, and E. K. Moscicki, “An Epidemiologic
Investigation of Potential Risk Factors for Suicide Attempts,” Social
Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 35 (1990): 193–199; R. F. W.
Diekstra and W. Gulbinat, “The Epidemiology of Suicidal Behavior: A
Review of Three Continents,” World Health Statistical Quarterly, 46
(1993): 52–68; C. M. Pearce and G. Martin, “Predicting Suicide Attempts
Among Adolescents,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 90 (1994): 324–
328; A. Schmidtke, “Perspective: Suicide in Europe,” Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior, 27 (1997): 127–136.
52 And many, if not most: R. Siani, N. Garzotto, C. Zimmerman Tansella,
and M. Tansella, “Predictive Scales for Parasuicide Repetition: Further
Results,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 59 (1979): 17–23; N. Kreitman
and P. Casey, “Repetition of Parasuicide: An Epidemiological and Clinical
Study,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 153 (1988): 792–800; E. D. Myers,
“Predicting Repetition of Deliberate Self-Harm: A Review of the Literature
in the Light of a Current Study,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 77
(1988): 314–319; A. Öjehagen, G. Regnell, and L. Träskman-Bendz,
“Deliberate Self-Poisoning: Repeaters and Nonrepeaters Admitted to an
Intensive Care Unit,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 84 (1991): 266–271;
H. Hjelmeland, “Repetition of Parasuicide: A Predictive Study,” Suicide
and Life-Threatening Behavior, 26 (1996): 395–404; U. Bille-Brahe, A.
Kerkhof, D. De Leo, A Schmidtke, P. Crepet, J. Lönnqvist, K. Michel, E.
Salander-Renberg, T. C. Stiles, D. Wasserman, B. Aagaard, H. Egebo, and
B. Jensen, “A Repetition-Prediction Study of European Parasuicide
Populations: A Summary of the First Report from Part II of the
WHO/EURO Multicentre Study on Parasuicide,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 95 (1977): 81–86.
53 Women in the United States: R. N. Anderson, K. D. Kochanek, and S. L.
Murphy, “Advance Report of Final Mortality Statistics, 1995,” Monthly
Vital Statistics Report, 45 (Hyattsville, Md.: National Center for Health
Statistics, 1997), DHHS Publication No. (PHS) 97–1120.
54 The reasons for this: D. Lester, “The Distribution of Sex and Age
Among Completed Suicides,” International Journal of Social Psychiatry,
28 (1982): 256–260; A. R. Rich, J. Kirkpatrick-Smith, R. L. Bonner, and F.

Jans, “Gender Differences in the Psychosocial Correlates of Suicidal
Ideation Among Adolescents,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 22
(1992): 364–373; E. K. Moscicki, “Gender Differences in Completed and
Attempted Suicides,” Annals of Epidemiology, 4 (1994): 152–158; M. A.
Young, L. F. Fogg, W. A. Scheftner, and J. A. Fawcett, “Interactions of Risk
Factors in Predicting Suicide,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 151
(1994): 434–435; Silva Sara Canetto and David Lester, eds., Women and
Suicidal Behavior (New York: Springer, 1995); S. S. Canetto, “Gender and
Suicidal Behavior: Theories and Evidence,” in R. W. Maris, M. M.
Silverman, and S. S. Canetto, eds., Review of Suicidology (New York:
Guilford, 1997), pp. 138–167; G. E. Murphy, “Why Women Are Less
Likely Than Men to Commit Suicide,” Comprehensive Psychiatry, 39
(1998): 165–175.
55 Women and girls, for example: M. M. Weissman, P. J. Leaf, C. E. Holzer
III, J. K. Myers, and G. L. Tischler, “The Epidemiology of Depression: An
Update on Sex Differences in Rates,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 7
(1984): 179–188; J. E. Fleming, D. R. Offord, and M. H. Boyle, “The
Ontario Child Health Study: Prevalence of Childhood and Adolescent
Depression in the Community,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 155 (1989):
647–654; C. Z. Garrison, K. L. Jackson, F. Marsteller, R. McKeown, and C.
Addy, “A Longitudinal Study of Depressive Symptomatology in Young
Adolescents,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 29 (1990): 581–585.
56 This higher rate of depression: M. Weissman and M. Olfson,
“Depression in Women: Implications for Health Care Research,” Science,
269 (1995): 799–801; M. Weissman, R. C. Bland, G. J. Canino, C.
Faravelli, S. Greenwald, H.-G. Hwu, P. R. Joyce, E. G. Karam. C.-K. Lee,
J. Lellouch, J.-P. Lépine, S. C. Newman, M. Rubio-Stipec, J. E. Wells, P. J.
Wickramaratne, H.-U. Wittehen, and E.-K. Yeh, “Cross-National
Epidemiology of Major Depression and Bipolar Disorder,” Journal of the
American Medical Association, 276 (1996): 293–299.
57 There is also evidence: H. White and J. M. Stillion, “Sex Differences in
Attitudes Toward Suicide: Do Males Stigmatize Males?” Psychology of
Women Quarterly, 12 (1988): 357–366.
58 American Journal of Insanity: E. K. Hunt, “Statistics of Suicide in the
United States,” American Journal of Insanity, 1 (1845): 225–234.
59 between those who attempt suicide: E. Robins, G. E. Murphy, R. H.

Wilkinson Jr., S. Gassner, and J. Kays, “Some Clinical Considerations in
the Prevention of Suicide Based on a Study of 134 Successful Suicides,”
American Journal of Public Health, 49 (1959): 888–899; T. L. Dorpat and
H. S. Ripley, “A Study of Suicide in the Seattle Area,” Comprehensive
Psychiatry, 1 (1960): 349–359; B. Barraclough, J. Bunch, B. Nelson, and P.
Sainsbury, “A Hundred Cases of Suicide: Clinical Aspects,” British Journal
of Psychiatry, 125 (1974): 355–373; I. M. K. Ovenstone and N. Kreitman,
“Two Syndromes of Suicide,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 124 (1974):
336–345.
60 long-term (ten- to forty-year) follow-up studies: P. B. Schneider, La
Tentative de suicide: Étude statistique, clinique, psychologique et
catamnestique (Neuchâtel and Paris: Delachauz et Niestlé, 1954); O Otto,
“Suicidal Acts by Children and Adolescents,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 233 (Suppl.), 1972; K. G. Dahlgren, “Attempted Suicides—
35 Years Afterwards,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 7 (1977):
75–79; O. Ekeberg, O. Ellingsen, and D. Jacobsen, “Mortality and Causes
of Death in a 10-Year Follow-up of Patients Treated for Self-Poisonings in
Oslo,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 24 (1994): 398–405.
61 Predicting who: J. A. Motto, “Suicide Attempts: A Longitudinal View,”
Archives of General Psychiatry, 13 (1965): 516–520; S. Greer and H. A.
Lee, “Subsequent Progress of Potentially Lethal Suicide Attempts,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 43 (1967): 361–371; J. Tuckman and W. F.
Youngman, “Assessment of Suicide Risk in Attempted Suicides,” in H. L.
P. Resnik, ed., Suicidal Behaviors: Diagnosis and Management (Boston:
Little, Brown, 1968), pp. 190–197; J. Lönnqvist, P. Niskanen, K. A. Achte,
and L. Ginman, “Self-Poisoning with Follow-up Considerations,” Suicide
and Life-Threatening Behavior, 5 (1975): 39–46; G. Paerregaard, “Suicide
Among Attempted Suicides: A 10-Year Follow-up,” Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior, 5 (1975): 140–144; A. T. Beck, R. A. Steer, M.
Kovacs, and B. Garrison, “Hopelessness and Eventual Suicide: A 10 Year
Prospective Study of Patients Hospitalized with Suicidal Ideation,”
American Journal of Psychiatry, 142 (1985): 559–563; J. Cullberg, D.
Wasserman, and C. G. Stefansson, “Who Commits Suicide After a Suicide
Attempt?” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 77 (1988): 598–603.
62 “Do I deserve credit”: Robert Lowell, “Suicide,” lines 46–55; Day by
Day (London: Faber and Faber, 1978), p. 16.
63 Suicide, which kills: Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 46 (1997),
p. 942.

64 A recent World Health Organization report: World Health Organization,
The World Health Report 1999 (Geneva: World Health Organization, 1999).
65 British researchers: P. Sainsbury, J. Jenkins, and A. Levey, “The Social
Correlates of Suicide in Europe,” in R. D. T. Farmer and S. R. Hirsch, eds.,
The Suicide Syndrome (London: Croom Helm, 1980), pp. 38–53; U.
Åsgård, P. Nordström, and G. Råbäck, “Birth Cohort Analysis of Changing
Suicide Risk by Sex and Age in Sweden 1952 to 1981,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 76 (1987): 456–463; S. P. Kachur, L. B. Potter, S. P. James,
and K. E. Powell, Suicide in the United States, 1980–1992 (Atlanta, Ga.:
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, 1995).
66 The strong trend toward higher: E. M. Brooke, Suicide and Attempted
Suicide, Public Health Paper No. 58 (Geneva: World Health Organization,
1974); C. Jennings and B. Barraclough, “Legal and Administrative
Influences on the English Suicide Rate Since 1900,” Psychological
Medicine, 10 (1980): 407–418; G. E. Murphy and R. D. Wetzel, “Suicide
Risk by Birth Cohort in the United States, 1949 to 1974,” Archives of
General Psychiatry, 37 (1980): 519–523; O. Hagnell, J. Lanke, B.
Rorsman, and L. Ojesjo, “Are We Entering an Age of Melancholy?
Depressive Illness in a Prospective Epidemiological Study over 25 Years:
The Lundby Study, Sweden,” Psychological Medicine, 12 (1982): 279–289;
G. L. Klerman, P. W. Lavori, J. Rice, T. Reich, J. Endicott, N. C.
Andreasen, M. B. Keller, and R. M. A. Hirschfeld, “Birth Cohort Trends in
Rates of Major Depressive Disorder Among Relatives of Patients with
Affective Disorder,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 42 (1985): 689–695;
R. T. Rubin, “Mood Changes During Adolescence,” in J. Bancroft and J.
Reinisch, eds., Adolescence and Puberty (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1990); L. N. Robins and D. A. Regier, eds., Psychiatric Disorders in
America: The Epidemiologic Catchment Area Study (New York: Free Press,
1991); N. D. Ryan, D. E. Williamson, S. Iyengar, H. Orvaschel, T. Reich, R.
E. Dahl, and J. Puig-Antich, “A Secular Increase in Child and Adolescent
Onset Affective Disorder,” Journal of American Academy of Child
Psychiatry, 31 (1992): 600–605; J. L. McIntosh, “Generational Analyses of
Suicide: Baby Boomers and 13ers,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior,
24 (1994): 334–342; C. Pritchard, “New Patterns of Suicide by Age and
Gender in the United Kingdom and the Western World 1974–1992: An
Indicator of Social Change?” Social Psychiatry Psychiatric Epidemiology,
31 (1996): 227–234.
67 Data for graphs: World Bank, World Development Report 1993:

Investing in Health (New York: Oxford University Press for the World
Bank, 1993); C. J. L. Murray and A. D. Lopez, The Global Burden of
Disease (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1996).
68 American and Finnish studies: P. Räsänen, H. Hakko, M. Isohanni, S.
Hodgins, M.-R. Järvelin, and J. Tiihonen, “Maternal Smoking During
Pregnancy and Risk of Criminal Behavior Among Adult Male Offspring in
the Northern Finland 1966 Birth Cohort,” American Journal of Psychiatry,
156 (1999): 857–862; M. M. Weissman, V. Warner, P. J. Wickramartne, and
D. B. Kandel, “Maternal Smoking During Pregnancy and Psychopathology
in Offspring Followed to Adulthood,” Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 38 (1999): 892–899.
ESSAY • THIS LIFE, THIS DEATH
1 “Minds of men fashioned”: “The U.S. Air Force Song,” ll. 10–13, 15–16,
28. Words and music by Robert Crawford. (Copyright © 1939, 1942, 1951
by Carl Fischer, Inc.)
2 “And He will raise you”: from “On Eagle’s Wings,” refrain and l. 1 of
verse 3. Text and music, 1979, New Dawn Music. Lyrics by Michael Joncas
(adapted from Psalm 91).
3 “As we soar”: from “One More Roll,” by Commander Jerry Coffee
(Hanoi, 1968).
4 “We will run”: “We Will Rise Again,” refrain. Text and music by David
Haas, text based upon Isaiah 40, 41. OCP Publications, 1985.
3 • TAKE OFF THE AMBER, PUT OUT THE LAMP
1 “It is time”: Quoted in Viktoria Schweitzer, Tsvetaeva (New York: Farrar,
Straus and Giroux, 1992), p. 377. Russian poet Marina Tsvetaeva (1892–
1941) wrote these lines six months before she killed herself. Her friend
Boris Pasternak said of her that she was “determined, militant, indomitable.
In her life and in her work she rushed impetuously, eagerly, and almost
rapaciously toward the achievement of finality and definiteness.” Her work,
he wrote, was “immense, violent” and a “great triumph for Russian poetry.”
Boris Pasternak, I Remember: Sketches for an Autobiography (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1983), pp. 109–110.

2 “Suicide notes,” he writes: E. Shneidman, Voices of Death (New York:
Bantam Books, 1980), p. 58.
3 Perhaps one in four does: A review of sixteen studies of rates of suicide
notes finds that the percentage of those leaving notes ranges between 10
and 42; the three largest studies of suicides (sample sizes 3,127, 1,418, and
1,033) report rates of 30, 23, and 21 percent, respectively. The most
frequently cited study of suicide notes (E. S. Shneidman and N. L.
Farberow, “Some Comparisons Between Genuine and Simulated Suicide
Notes in Terms of Mowrer’s Concepts of Discomfort and Relief,” Journal
of General Psychology, 56 [1957]: 251–256) found that 15 percent of the
721 suicides had left notes. See also J. Tuckman, R. J. Kleiner, and M.
Lavell, “Emotional Content of Suicide Notes,” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 116 (1959): 59–63; L. B. Bourque, B. Cosand, and J. Kraus,
“Comparison of Male and Female Suicide in a Defined Community,”
Journal of Community Health, 9 (1983): 7–17; J. A. Posener, A. LaHaye,
and P. N. Cheifetz, “Suicide Notes in Adolescence,” Canadian Journal of
Psychiatry, 1989 (34): 171–176; N. Heim and D. Lester, “Do Suicides Who
Write Notes Differ from Those Who Do Not? A Study of Suicides in West
Berlin,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 82 (1990): 372–373; R.
Chynoweth, “The Significance of Suicide Notes,” Australian and New
Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 11 (1997): 197–200.
4 Lo, my name is abhorred: C. Thomas, “First Suicide Note?” British
Medical Journal, July 26, 1980, pp. 284–285.
5 Goodbye, my friend: Sergei Esenin, quoted in Gordon McVay, Esenin: A
Life (Ann Arbor, Mich.: Ardis, 1976), p. 288.
6 Paul Celan, for example: Quoted in J. Felstiner, Paul Celan: Poet,
Survivor, Jew (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1995), p. 287.
7 “The cadence of suffering”: Quoted in D. Lajolo, An Absurd Vice: A
Biography of Cesare Pavese (New York: New Directions, 1983), p. 238.
8 notes ranged in length: I. O’Donnell, R. Farmer, and J. Catalan, “Suicide
Notes,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 163 (1993): 45–48, p. 47.
9 only an explicit warning: A. Leenaars, Suicide Notes: Predictive Clues
and Patterns (New York: Human Sciences Press, 1988), pp. 232, 255.
10 The reasons given: A. Capstick, “Recognition of Emotional Disturbance
and the Prevention of Suicide,” British Medical Journal, 1 (1960): 1179–
1181; S. L. Cohen and J. E. Fiedler, “Content Analysis of Multiple
Messages in Suicide Notes,” Life-Threatening Behavior, 4 (1974) 75–95.

11 Young children are less specific: J. A. Posener, A. LaHaye, and P. N.
Cheifetz, “Suicide Notes in Adolescence”; B. Grøholt, Ø. Ekeberg, L.
Wichstrøm, and T. Haldorsen, “Youth Suicide in Norway, 1990–1992: A
Comparison Between Children and Adolescents Completing Suicide and
Age- and Gender-Matched Controls,” Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behavior, 27 (1997): 250–263.
12 “No one is to blame”: Quoted in E. R. Ellis and G. N. Allen, Traitor
Within: Our Suicide Problem (New York: Doubleday, 1961), p. 183.
13 The majority of all suicide notes: J. Tuckman, R. J. Kleiner, and M.
Lavell, “Emotional Content of Suicide Notes,” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 116 (1959): 59–63.
14 “I used to love you”: Cited in H. Wolf, “Suicide Notes,” American
Mercury, 24 (1931): 264–272, p. 265.
15 “I hate you”: Tuckman et al., “Emotional Content of Suicide Notes,” p.
60.
16 Suicide notes in general: E. S. Shneidman and N. L. Farberow, “Some
Comparisons Between Genuine and Simulated Suicide Notes in Terms of
Mowrer’s Concepts of Discomfort and Relief,” Journal of General
Psychology, 56 (1957): 251–256; L. A. Gottschalk and G. C. Gleser, “An
Analysis of the Verbal Content of Suicide Notes,” British Journal of
Medical Psychology, 33 (1960): 195; D. E. Spiegel and C. Neuringer, “Role
of Dread in Suicidal Behavior,” Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 66 (1963): 507–511; D. M. Ogilvie, P. J. Stone, and E. S.
Shneidman, “Some Characteristics of Genuine Versus Simulated Suicide
Notes,” Bulletin of Suicidology, March 1969, 27–32; R. I. Yufit, B. Benzies,
M. E. Fonte, and J. A. Fawcett, “Suicide Potential and Time Perspective,”
Archives of General Psychiatry, 23 (1970): 158–163; S. Arbeit and S. J.
Blatt, “Differentiation of Simulated and Genuine Suicide Notes,”
Psychological Reports, 33 (1973): 283–297; D. Lester, “Temporal
Perspective and Completed Suicide,” Perceptual and Motor Skills, 36
(1973): 760; A. A. Leenaars and W. D. G. Balance, “A Predictive Approach
to Freud’s Formulations Regarding Suicide,” Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behavior, 14 (1984): 275–283; D. Lester, “Can Suicidologists Distinguish
Between Suicide Notes from Completers and Attempters?” Perceptual and
Motor Skills, 79 (1994): 1498.
17 “To whom it may concern”: Quoted in Ellis and Allen, Traitor Within, p.
62.

18 “Dear Dear Betty”: Wolf, “Suicide Notes,” p. 264.
19 “I am known to Mr. Herschell”: Anonymous, American Journal of
Insanity, 13 (1857): 401–402, p. 401.
20 “On the one hand”: Ibid., p. 402.
21 “I wish I could explain it”: Suicide note reproduced in A. A. Leenaars,
Suicide Notes: Predictive Clues and Patterns (New York: Human Sciences
Press, 1988), pp. 247–248.
22 “I will be of no use”: Wolf, “Suicide Notes,” p. 271.
23 “21st.—Slept horribly”: Autobiography of Benjamin Robert Haydon,
with an Introduction and Epilogue by Edmund Blunden (London: Oxford
University Press, 1927; autobiography first published 1853), p. 399.
24 “The world I am living in now”: Quoted in M. Iga, The Thorn in the
Chrysanthemum: Suicide and Economic Success in Modern Japan
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986), pp. 82–83.
25 “Do not grieve for me”: Quoted in James Curtis, James Whale: A New
World of Gods and Monsters (Boston: Faber and Faber, 1998), pp. 384–385.
26 The awareness of the damage done: H. Warnes, “Suicide in
Schizophrenics,” Diseases of the Nervous System, 29 (1968): 35–40; R. E.
Drake, C. Gates, P. G. Cotton, and A. Whitaker, “Suicide Among
Schizophrenics: Who Is at Risk?” Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
172 (1984): 613–617; C. Dingman and T. McGlashan, “Discriminating
Characteristics of Suicides: Chestnut Lodge Follow-up Sample Including
Patients with Affective Disorder, Schizophrenia and Schizoaffective
Disorder,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 74 (1986): 91–97; A. Roy,
“Suicide in Schizophrenia,” in A. Roy, ed., Suicide (Baltimore: Williams &
Wilkins, 1986), pp. 97–112; A. A. Salama, “Depression and Suicide in
Schizophrenic Patients,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 18 (1988):
379–384; J. F. Westermeyer, M. Harrow, and J. T. Marengo, “Risk for
Suicide in Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic and Nonpsychotic
Disorders,” Journal of Nervous and Mental Disorders, 179 (1991): 259–
266; X. F. Amador, J. Harkavy Friedman, C. Kasapis, S. A. Yale, M. Flaum,
and J. M. Gorman, “Suicidal Behavior in Schizophrenia and Its
Relationship to Awareness of Illness,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 153
(1996): 1185–1188; K. J. Kaplan and M. Harrow, “Positive and Negative
Symptoms as Risk Factors for Later Suicidal Activity in Schizophrenics
Versus Depressives,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 26 (1996):
105–121; C. D. Rossau and P. B. Mortensen, “Risk Factors for Suicide in

Patients with Schizophrenia: Nested Case-Control Study,” British Journal
of Psychiatry, 171 (1997): 355–359.
27 “It was so queer”: Quoted in Randall Jarrell’s Letters: An
Autobiographical and Literary Selection (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1985),
Mary Jarrell, ed., p. 516.
28 “I feel certain”: Virginia Woolf, March 18 (?), 1941, in Virginia Woolf,
The Letters, vol. 6, eds. N. Nicolson and J. Trautman (London: Hogarth
Press, 1975–1980), p. 481.
29 “Dearest, I want to tell you”: Virginia Woolf, March 28, 1941, ibid., pp.
486–487.
30 “Everyone who has known me”: Quoted in Bruce Kellner, The Last
Dandy: Ralph Barton (Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 1991), p.
213.
31 “A suicide’s excuses”: A. Alvarez, The Savage God: A Study of Suicide
(London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1971), p. 97.
32 In classical antiquity: Anton van Hooff, From Autothanasia to Suicide:
Self-Killing in Classical Antiquity (London: Routledge, 1990).
33 By the nineteenth century, Bierre de Boismont: Data from Bierre de
Boismont cited in Henry Romilly Fedden, Suicide: A Social and Historical
Study (London: Peter Davies, 1938), p. 344.
34 Tom Wehr and his colleagues: T. A. Wehr, D. A. Sack, and N. E.
Rosenthal, “Sleep Reduction as a Final Common Pathway in the Genesis of
Mania,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 144 (1987): 201–204; S. Malkoff-
Schwartz, E. Frank, B. Anderson, J. T. Sherrill, L. Siegel, D. Patterson, and
D. J. Kupfer, “Stressful Life Events and Social Rhythm Disruption in the
Onset of Manic and Depressive Bipolar Episodes,” Archives of General
Psychiatry, 55 (1998): 702–707.
35 People, when manic or depressed: C. Hammen, “Generation of Stress in
the Course of Unipolar Depression,” Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100
(1991): 555–561; X.-J. Cui and G. E. Vaillant, “Does Depression Generate
Negative Life Events?” Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 185
(1997): 145–150.
36 no consistent strong relationship: R. D. Goldney and P. W. Burvill,
“Trends in Suicidal Behaviour and Its Management,” Australian and New
Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 14 (1980): 1–15; D. M. Shepherd and B. M.
Barraclough, “Work and Suicide: An Empirical Investigation,” British

Journal of Psychiatry, 136 (1980): 469–478; S. Platt, “Unemployment and
Suicidal Behaviour: A Review of the Literature,” Social Science and
Medicine, 19 (1984): 93–115; H. J. Cormier and G. L. Klerman,
“Unemployment 
and 
Male-Female 
Labor 
Force 
Participation 
as
Determinants of Changing Suicide Rates of Males and Females in Quebec,”
Social Psychiatry, 20 (1985): 109–114; A. Beautrais, P. R. Joyce, and R. T.
Mulder, “Unemployment and Serious Suicide Attempts,” Psychological
Medicine, 28 (1998): 209–218.
37 Most research finds: G. W. Brown and J. L. T. Birley, “Crises and Life
Changes and the Onset of Schizophrenia,” Journal of Health and Social
Behavior, 9 (1968): 203–214; A. Ambelas, “Psychologically Stressful Life
Events in the Precipitation of Manic Episodes,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 135 (1979): 15–21; D. L. Dunner, V. Patrick, and R. R. Fieve,
“Life Events and Onset of Bipolar Disorder,” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 136 (1979): 508–511; A. Ambelas, “Life Events and Mania: A
Special Relationship?” British Journal of Psychiatry, 150 (1987): 235–240;
R. Day, J. A. Neilsen, A. Korten, et al., “Stressful Life Events Preceding the
Acute Onset of Schizophrenia: A Cross-National Study from the World
Health Organization,” Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, 11 (1987): 123–
206; A. Ellicott, C. Hammen, M. Gitlin, G. Brown, and K. Jamison, “Life
Events and Course of Bipolar Disorder,” American Journal of Psychiatry,
147 (1990): 1194–1198; F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison, Manic-
Depressive Illness (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990); P.
Bebbington, S. Wilkins, P. Jones, A. Foerster, R. Murray, B. Toone, and S.
Lewis, “Life Events and Psychosis: Initial Results from the Camberwell
Collaborative Psychosis Study,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 162 (1993):
72–79.
38 although the influence: R. M. Post, D. Rubinow, and J. C. Ballenger,
“Conditioning and Sensitisation in the Longitudinal Course of Affective
Illness,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 149 (1986): 191–201; R. M. Post,
“Transduction of Psychosocial Stress into the Neurobiology of Recurrent
Affective Disorder,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 149 (1992): 999–
1010.
39 Patients with mood disorders: A. Breier, “Stress, Dopamine, and
Schizophrenia: Evidence for a Stress-Diathesis Model,” in C. M. Mazure,
ed., Does Stress Cause Psychiatric Illness? (Washington, D.C.: American
Psychiatric Press, 1995), pp. 67–86; B. P. Dohrenwend, P. E. Shrout, B. G.
Link, A. E. Skodol, and A. Stueve, “Life Events and Other Possible

Psychosocial Risk Factors for Episodes of Schizophrenia and Major
Depression: A Case-Control Study,” in Mazure, ed., Does Stress Cause
Psychiatric Illness?, pp. 43–65.
40 Psychologist Sherry Johnson: S. L. Johnson and I. Miller, “Negative Life
Events and Time to Recovery from Episodes of Bipolar Disorder,” Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 106 (1997): 449–457.
41 Sudden heartbreak: E. S. Paykel and D. Dowlatshahi, “Life Events and
Mental Disorder,” in S. Fisher and J. Reason, eds., Handbook of Life Stress,
Cognition, and Health (New York: J. Wiley and Sons, 1988), pp. 241–263;
M. Heikkinen, H. Aro, and J. Lönnqvist, “Life Events and Social Support in
Suicide,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 23 (1993): 343–358; E.
Isometsä, M. Heikkinen, M. Henriksson, H. Aro, and J. Lönnqvist, “Recent
Life Events and Completed Suicide in Bipolar Affective Disorder: A
Comparison with Major Depressive Suicides,” Journal of Affective
Disorders, 33 (1995): 99–106.
42 Difficulties and conflicts: G. E. Murphy and E. Robins, “Social Factors
in Suicide,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 199 (1967):
303–308; G. E. Murphy, J. W. Armstrong, S. L. Hermele, J. R. Fischer, and
W. W. Clendenin, “Suicide and Alcoholism: Interpersonal Loss Confirmed
as a Predictor,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 36 (1979): 65–69; G. E.
Murphy, “Suicide in Alcoholism,” in A. Roy, ed., Suicide (Baltimore:
Williams & Wilkins, 1986), pp. 89–96; C. L. Rich, R. C. Fowler, L. A.
Fogarty, and D. Young, “San Diego Suicide Study: III. Relationship
Between Diagnoses and Stressors,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 45
(1988): 589–592.
43 Sometimes the reasons: T. F. Dugan and M. L. Belfer, “Suicide in
Children,” in D. Jacobs and H. N. Brown, eds., Suicide: Understanding and
Responding: Harvard Medical School Perspectives (Madison, Conn.:
International Universities Press, 1990), pp. 201–220, p. 201.
44 In a large Finnish study: M. Heikkinen, H. Aro, and J. Lönnqvist, “The
Partners’ Views on Precipitant Stressors in Suicide,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 85 (1992): 380–384.
45 Young or adolescent boys: D. Shaffer, “Suicide in Childhood and
Adolescence,” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 15 (1974):
275–291; C. L. Rich, D. Young, and R. C. Fowler, “San Diego Suicide
Study: I. Young vs. Old Subjects,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 43
(1986): 577–582; D. J. Poteet, “Adolescent Suicide: A Review of 87 Cases

of Completed Suicide in Shelby County, Tennessee,” American Journal of
Forensic Medicine and Pathology, 8 (1987): 12–17; D. A. Brent, J. A.
Perper, C. E. Goldstein, D. J. Kolke, M. J. Allan, C. J. Allmen, and J. P.
Zelenak, “Risk Factors for Adolescent Suicide: A Comparison of
Adolescent Suicide Victims with Suicidal Inpatients,” Archives of General
Psychiatry, 45 (1988): 581–588; H. H. Hoberman and B. D. Garfinkel,
“Completed Suicide in Youth,” Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 33 (1988):
494–504; D. A. Brent, J. A. Perper, G. Moritz, M. Baugher, C. Roth, L.
Balach, and J. Schweers, “Stressful Life Events, Psychopathology, and
Adolescent Suicide: A Case Control Study,” Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behavior, 23 (1993): 179–187; L. Davidson, M. L. Rosenberg, J. A. Mercy,
J. Franklin, and J. T. Simmons, “An Epidemiologic Study of Risk Factors in
Two Teenage Suicide Clusters,” Journal of the American Medical
Association, 262 (1989): 2687–2692; M. Marttunen, H. M. Aro, and J. K.
Lönnqvist, “Precipitant Stressors in Adolescent Suicide,” Journal of the
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 32 (1993): 1178–1183; M. S.
Gould, P. Fisher, M. Paridas, M. Flory, and D. Shaffer, “Psychosocial Risk
Factors of Child and Adolescent Completed Suicide,” Archives of General
Psychiatry, 53 (1996): 1155–1162.
46 David Shaffer: D. Shaffer, “Suicide in Childhood and Adolescence,”
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 15 (1974): 275–291; M.
Shafii, S. Carrigan, J. R. Whittinghill, and A. Derrick, “Psychological
Autopsy of Completed Suicide in Children and Adolescents,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 142 (1985): 1061–1064; R. C. Fowler, C. L. Rich,
and D. Young, “San Diego Suicide Study: II. Substance Abuse in Young
Cases,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 43 (1986): 962–965; D. Shaffer, A.
Garland, M. Gould, P. Fisher, and P. Trautman, “Preventing Teenage
Suicide: A Critical Review,” Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 27 (1988): 675–687; D. A. Brent, J. A. Perper,
C. E. Goldstein, D. J. Kolke, M. J. Allan, C. J. Allman, and J. P. Zelenak,
“Risk Factors for Adolescent Suicide: A Comparison of Adolescent Suicide
Victims with Suicidal Inpatients,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 45
(1988): 581–588; D. Shaffer, “The Epidemiology of Teen Suicide: An
Examination of Risk Factors,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 49 (1988):
36–41; M. Shaffi, J. Steltz-Lenarsky, A. M. Derrick, C. Beckner, and R.
Whittinghill, “Comorbidity of Mental Disorders in the Post-Mortem
Diagnosis of Completed Suicide in Children and Adolescents,” Journal of
Affective Disorders, 15 (1988): 227–233; B. Runeson, “Mental Disorders in

Youth Suicide: DSM-III-R Axes I and I,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica,
79 (1989): 490–497; F. E. Crumley, “Substance Abuse and Adolescent
Suicidal Behavior,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 263
(1990): 3051–3056; M. Kovacs, D. Goldston, and C. Gatsonis, “Suicidal
Behaviors and Childhood-Onset Depressive Disorders: A Longitudinal
Investigation,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 32 (1993): 8–20; M. J. Marttunen, H. M. Aro, M. M.
Henriksson, and J. K. Lönnqvist, “Antisocial Behaviour in Adolescent
Suicide,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 89 (1994): 167–173; D. Shaffer,
M. S. Gould, P. Fisher, P. Trautman, D. Moreau, M. Kleinman, and M.
Flory, “Psychiatric Diagnosis in Child and Adolescent Suicide,” Archives of
General Psychiatry, 53 (1996): 339–348; B. M. Wagner, R. E. Cole, and P.
Schwartzman, “Comorbidity of Symptoms Among Junior and Senior High
School Suicide Attempters,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 26
(1996) 300–307; B. Grøholt, Ø. Ekeberg, L. Wichstrøm, and T. Haldorsen,
“Youth Suicide in Norway, 1990–1992,” Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behavior, 27 (1997): 250–263.
47 The fact that most parents: D. M. Velting, D. Shaffer, M. S. Gould, R.
Garfinkel, P. Fisher, and M. Davies, “Parent-Victim Agreement in
Adolescent Suicide Research,” Journal of the Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 37 (1998): 1161–1166.
48 Recent research shows: M. M. Weissman, S. Wolk, R. B. Goldstein, D.
Moreau, P. Adams, S. Greenwald, C. M. Klier, N. D. Ryan, R. E. Dahl, and
P. Wickramaratne, “Depressed Adolescents Grow Up,” Journal of the
American Medical Association, 281 (1999): 1707–1713.
49 “Once … he wrote a poem”: Quoted in J. J. Norwich, Christmas
Crackers (London: Penguin, 1982), p. 105.
50 Neuropsychologists and clinicians: These studies are reviewed in
“Thought Disorder, Perception, and Cognition,” in F. K. Goodwin and K. R.
Jamison, Manic-Depressive Illness (New York: Oxford University Press,
1990), pp. 247–280.
51 are less able: C. Neuringer, “Rigid Thinking in Suicidal Individuals,”
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76 (1964): 91–100; M.
Levenson and C. Neuringer, “Problem Solving Behavior in Suicidal
Adolescents,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 37 (1971):
433–436; A. Patsiokas, G. Clum, and R. Luscomb, “Cognitive
Characteristics of Suicide Attempters,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical

Psychology, 3 (1979): 478–484; R. L. Bonner and A. R. Rich, “Toward a
Predictive Model of Suicidal Ideation and Behavior,” Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior, 17 (1987): 50–63; B. C. McLeavey, R. J. Daly, C.
M. Murray, J. O’Riordan, and M. Taylor, “Interpersonal Problem-Solving
Deficits in Self-Poisoning Patients,” Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behavior, 17 (1987): 33–49; I. Orbach, E. Rosenheim, and E. Hary, “Some
Aspects of Cognitive Functioning in Suicidal Children,” Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 26 (1987): 181–
185; D. E. Schotte and G. A. Clum, “Problem-Solving Skills in Suicidal
Psychiatric Patients,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 55
(1987): 49–54; A. Bartfai, I.-M. Winborg, P. Nordström, and M. Åsberg,
“Suicidal Behavior and Cognitive Flexibility: Design and Verbal Fluency
After Attempted Suicide,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 20
(1990): 254–266; J. Evans, J. M. G. Williams, S. O’Loughlin, and K.
Howells, “Autobiographical Memory and Problem-Solving Strategies of
Parasuicide Patients,” Psychological Medicine, 22 (1992): 399–405; W.
Mraz and M. A. Runco, “Suicide Ideation and Creative Problem Solving,”
Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 24 (1994): 38–47.
52 Their thinking is more: V. J. Henken, “Banality Reinvestigated: A
Computer-Based Content Analysis of Suicidal and Forced Death
Documents,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 6 (1976): 36–43;
Antoon A. Leenaars, Suicide Notes: Predictive Clues and Patterns (New
York: Human Sciences Press, 1988); I. O’Donnell, R. Farmer, and J.
Catalan, “Suicide Notes,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 163 (1993): 45–48.
53 When suicidal patients: J. M. G. Williams and K. Broadbent,
“Autobiographical Memory in Attempted Suicide,” Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 95 (1986): 144–149; J. M. G. Williams and B. Dritschel,
“Emotional Disturbance and the Specificity of Autobiographical Memory,”
Cognition and Emotion, 2 (1988): 221–234; J. Evans, J. M. G. Williams, S.
O’Loughlin, and K. Howells, “Autobiographical Memory and Problem-
Solving Strategies of Parasuicide Patients,” Psychological Medicine, 22
(1992): 399–405.
54 When asked to think: A. K. MacLeod, G. S. Rose, and J. M. G.
Williams, “Components of Hopelessness About the Future in Parasuicide,”
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 17 (1993): 441–455; A. K. MacLeod, B.
Pankhania, M. Lee, and D. Mitchell, “Parasuicide, Depression and the
Anticipation of Positive and Negative Future Experiences,” Psychological
Medicine, 27 (1997): 973–977.

55 a sense of responsibility: M. Linehan, J. Goodstein, S. Nielsen, and J.
Chiles, “Reasons for Staying Alive When You Are Thinking of Killing
Yourself: The Reasons for Living Inventory,” Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 51 (1983): 276–286.
56 “This is my last experiment”: Quoted in Ellis and Allen, Traitor Within,
pp. 175–176.
57 The drawing is taken from A. L. Berman and D. A. Jobes, Adolescent
Suicide: Assessment and Intervention (Washington, D.C.: American
Psychological Association, 1991), pp. 133–134.
58 Aaron Beck and his colleagues: A. T. Beck, M. Kovacs, and A.
Weissman, “Hopelessness and Suicidal Behavior,” Journal of the American
Medical Association, 234 (1975): 1146–1149; A. E. Kazdin, N. H. French,
A. S. Unis, K. Esveldt-Dawson, and R. B. Sherick, “Hopelessness,
Depression, and Suicidal Intent Among Psychiatrically Disturbed Inpatient
Children,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 51 (1983): 504–
510; A. T. Beck, R. A. Steer, M. Kovacs, and B. Garrison, “Hopelessness
and Eventual Suicide: A 10-Year Prospective Study of Patients Hospitalized
with Suicidal Ideation,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 142 (1985): 559–
563; A. T. Beck, G. Brown, and R. A. Steer, “Prediction of Eventual
Suicide in Psychiatric Inpatients by Clinical Ratings of Hopelessness,”
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 57 (1989): 309–310; A. T.
Beck, G. Brown, B. J. Berchick, B. L. Stewart, and R. A. Steer,
“Relationship Between Hopelessness and Ultimate Suicide: A Replication
with Psychiatric Outpatients,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 147 (1990):
190–195.
59 Jan Fawcett: J. Fawcett, W. A. Sheftner, L. Fogg, D. C. Clark, M. A.
Young, D. Hedeker, and R. Gibbons, “Time-Related Predictors of Suicide
in Major Affective Disorder,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 147 (1990):
1189–1194.
60 “October 9th”: Excerpts from the journals of Dawn Renee Befano,
October 1995.
4 • THE BURDEN OF DESPAIR
1 “One forgets emotions”: Graham Greene, A Sort of Life, p. 127. Graham
Greene (1904–1991), like his grandfather, suffered from manic-depression.
As a schoolboy, he carved open his leg and attempted to poison himself

with deadly nightshade and aspirin; while an undergraduate, he played
Russian roulette six times within a period of six months. “I have never
understood,” he wrote in The End of the Affair, “why people who can
swallow the enormous improbability of a personal God boggle at a personal
Devil.” These events are described in Greene’s memoir, A Sort of Life
(London: Penguin Books, 1962; first published 1951), pp. 64–68 and 92–
96, and in Norman Sherry’s biography, The Life of Graham Greene, Volume
I: 1904–1939 (London: Jonathan Cape, 1989), pp. 85–91 and 154–160. The
direct quote is from The End of the Affair, p. 59.
2 “Miserableness is like”: Graham Greene, letter to Vivien Dayrell-
Browning, 1926 (quoted in Norman Sherry, The Life of Graham Greene,
Volume 1, 1904–1939 [New York: Viking Penguin, 1989], p. 276).
3 “I tried out other forms”: Graham Greene, A Sort of Life (London:
Penguin, 1972; first published 1971), p. 64.
4 “I felt nothing”: Ibid., p. 91.
5 “I slipped a bullet”: Ibid., pp. 93–94.
6 Study after study: E. Robins, G. E. Murphy, R. H. Wilkinson, S. Gassner,
and J. Kayes, “Some Clinical Considerations in the Prevention of Suicide
Based on a Study of 134 Successful Suicides,” American Journal of Public
Health, 49 (1959): 888–899; T. L. Dorpat and H. S. Ripley, “A Study of
Suicide in the Seattle Area,” Comprehensive Psychiatry, 1 (1960): 349–
350; B. M. Barraclough, J. Bunch, B. Nelson, and P. Sainsbury, “A Hundred
Cases of Suicide: Clinical Aspects,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 125
(1974): 355–373; O. Hagnell and B. Rorsman, “Suicide and Endogenous
Depression 
with 
Somatic 
Symptoms 
in 
the 
Lundby 
Study,”
Neuropsychobiology, 4 (1978): 180–187; J. Beskow, “Suicide and Mental
Disorder in Swedish Men,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 277 (Suppl.)
(1979): 1–138; O. Hagnell and B. Rorsman, “Suicide in the Lundby Study:
A Comparative Investigation of Clinical Aspects,” Neuropsychobiology, 5
(1979): 61–73; R. Chynoweth, J. I. Tonge, and J. Armstrong, “Suicide in
Brisbane—A Retrospective Psychosocial Study,” Australian and New
Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 14 (1980): 37–45; R. C. Fowler, C. L. Rich,
and D. Young, “San Diego Suicide Study: II. Substance Abuse in Young
Cases,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 43 (1986): 962–965; D. W. Black,
“The Iowa Record-Linkage Experience,” Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behavior, 19 (1989): 78–89; B. L. Tanney, “Mental Disorders, Psychiatric
Patients, and Suicide,” in R. W. Maris, A. L. Berman, J. T. Maltsberger, and

R. I. Yufit, eds., Assessment and Prediction of Suicide (New York: Guilford,
1992), pp. 277–320; A. T. A. Cheng, “Mental Illness and Suicide: A Case-
Control Study in East Taiwan,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 52 (1995):
594–603; T. Foster, K. Gillespie, and R. McClelland, “Mental Disorders
and Suicide in Northern Ireland,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 170 (1997):
447–452; J. Angst, F. Angst, and H. H. Stassen, “Suicide Risk in Patients
with Major Depressive Disorder,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, (Suppl. 2)
(1999): 57–62.
7 High rates of psychopathology: M. M. Weissman, “The Epidemiology of
Suicide Attempts, 1960–1971,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 30 (1974):
737–746; D. J. Pallis and P. Sainsbury, “The Value of Assessing Intent in
Attempted Suicide,” Psychological Medicine, 6 (1976): 487–492; J. G. B.
Newson-Smith and S. R. Hirsch, “Psychiatric Symptoms in Self-Poisoning
Patients,” Psychological Medicine, 9 (1979): 493–500; P. Urwin and J. L.
Gibbons, “Psychiatric Diagnosis in Self-Poisoning Cases,” Psychological
Medicine, 9 (1979): 501–507; R. D. Goldney, K. S. Adam, J. C. O’Brien,
and P. Termansen, “Depression in Young Women Who Have Attempted
Suicide: An International Replication Study,” Journal of Affective
Disorders, 3 (1981): 327–337; K. Hawton and J. Catalán, Attempted
Suicide: A Practical Guide to its Nature and Management (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1982); K. Michel, “Suicide Risk Factors: A Comparison
of Suicide Attempters with Suicide Completers,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 150 (1987): 78–82; A. L. Beautrais, P. R. Joyce, R. T. Mulder,
D. M. Fergusson, B. J. Deavoll, and S. K. Nightingale, “Prevalence and
Comorbidity of Mental Disorders in Persons Making Serious Suicide
Attempts: A Case-Control Study,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 153
(1996): 1009–1014; K. Suominen, M. Henriksson, J. Suokas, E. Isometsä,
A. Ostamo, and J. Lönnqvist, “Mental Disorders and Comorbidity in
Attempted Suicide,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 94 (1996): 234–240.
8 Work done by Clare Harris: E. C. Harris and B. Barraclough, “Suicide as
an Outcome for Mental Disorders: A Meta-Analysis,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 170 (1997): 205–228.
9 one-third of the patients: A. Stenbeck, K. A. Achté, and R. N. Rimón,
“Physical Disease, Hypochondria and Alcohol Addiction in Suicides
Committed by Mental Hospital Patients,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 111
(1965): 933–937.
10 Two things seem to be true: T. L. Dorpat, W. F. Anderson, and H. S.
Ripley, “The Relationship of Physical Illness to Suicide,” In H. L. P.

Resnick, ed., Suicidal Behaviors: Diagnosis and Management (Boston:
Little, Brown, 1968), pp. 209–219.
11 most of the medical conditions: F. A. Whitlock, “Suicide and Physical
Illness,” in A. Roy, ed., Suicide (Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1986), pp.
151–170; E. C. Harris and B. M. Barraclough, “Suicide as an Outcome for
Medical Disorders,” Medicine 73 (1994): 281–296; P. R. McHugh, “Suicide
and Medical Afflictions,” Medicine, 73 (1994): 297–298.
12 a three- to eightfold decrease: E. C. Harris and B. Barraclough, “Suicide
as an Outcome for Medical Disorder,” Medicine, 73 (1994): 281–296.
13 “airless and without exits”: A. Alvarez, The Savage God (New York: W.
W. Norton, 1990; first published 1971), p. 293.
14 “I have been and am”: Sylvia Plath, The Journals of Sylvia Plath, T.
Hughes and F. McCullough, eds. (New York: Dial Press, 1982), p. 240.
15 “The next thing”: Alan Garner, The Voice That Thunders: Essays and
Lectures (London: Harvill Press, 1997), pp. 208–209.
16 “What I had begun”: William Styron, Darkness Visible: A Memoir of
Madness (New York: Random House, 1990), p. 50.
17 “becomes changed”: Hugo Wolf, quoted in F. Walker, Hugo Wolf: A
Biography (London: J. M. Dent & Sons, 1968), p. 359.
18 “tireless, madly sanguine”: Robert Lowell, “Near the Unbalanced
Aquarium,” in R. Giroux, ed., Robert Lowell: Collected Prose (New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1987), p. 353.
19 the “Columbus”: V. Mayakovsky, quoted in V. Markov, The Longer
Poems of Velimir Khlebnikov (Westport: Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1975), p.
23.
20 “Working with number”: Ibid., pp. 362–363.
21 “The condition of my mind”: E. Reiss, Konstitutionelle Verstimmung
und Alanisch-Depressive Irresein: Klinische Untersuchungen über den
Zusammenhang von Veranlagung und Psychose (Berlin: J. Springer, 1910).
22 One person in a hundred: F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison, Manic-
Depressive Illness (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990); L. N.
Robins and D. A. Regier, Psychiatric Disorders in America: The
Epidemiologic Catchment Area Study (New York: Free Press, 1991); R. C.
Kessler, D. R. Rubinow, C. Holmes, J. M. Abelson, and S. Zhao, “The
Epidemiology of DSM-III-R Bipolar I Disorder in a General Population
Survey,” Psychological Medicine, 27 (1997): 1079–1089.

23 at least twice as common: M. M. Weissman, R. C. Bland, G. J. Canino,
C. Faravelli, S. Greenwald, H.-G. Hwu, P. R. Joyce, E. G. Karam, C.-K.
Lee, J. Lellouch, J.-P. Lépine, S. C. Newman, M. Rubio-Stipec, E. Wells, P.
J. Wickramaratne, H.-U. Wittchen, and E.-K. Yeh, “Cross-National
Epidemiology of Major Depression and Bipolar Disorder,” Journal of the
American Medical Association, 276 (1996): 293–299; J. Angst, “The
Prevalence of Depression,” in M. Briley and S. A. Montgomery, eds.,
Antidepressant Therapy: At the Dawn of the Third Millennium (St. Louis:
Mosby, 1998), pp. 191–212.
24 Bipolar illness is generally: F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison, Manic-
Depressive Illness (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990); D. A.
Regier, M. E. Farmer, D. S. Raye, B. Z. Locke, S. J. Keith, L. L. Judd, and
F. K. Goodwin, “Co-Morbidity of Mental Disorders with Drug and Alcohol
Abuse: Results from the Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) Study,”
Journal of the American Medical Association, 264 (1990): 2511–2518; D.
F. MacKinnon, K. R. Jamison, and J. R. DePaulo, “Genetics of Manic-
Depressive Illness,” Annual Review of Neuroscience, 20 (1997): 355–373.
25 Suicide attempts are disproportionately high: G. F. Johnson and G. Hunt,
“Suicidal Behavior in Bipolar Manic-Depressive Patients and Their
Families,” Comprehensive Psychiatry, 20 (1979): 159–164; K. R. Jamison,
“Suicide and Bipolar Disorders,” Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 487 (1986): 301–315; Y. W. Chen and S. C. Dilsaver, “Lifetime
Rates of Suicide Attempts Among Subjects with Bipolar and Unipolar
Disorders Relative to Subjects with Other Axis I Disorders,” Biological
Psychiatry, 39 (1996): 896–899; F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison, Manic-
Depressive Illness (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990); S.-Y. Tsai,
C.-C. Chen, and E.-K. Yeh, “Alcohol Problems and Long-Term
Psychosocial Outcome in Chinese Patients with Bipolar Disorder,” Journal
of Affective Disorders, 46 (1997): 143–150; R. C. Kessler and E. E. Walters,
“Epidemiology of DSM-III-R Major Depression and Minor Depression
Among Adolescents and Young Adults in the National Comorbidity
Survey,” Depression and Anxiety, 7 (1998): 3–14. S. G. Simpson and K. R.
Jamison, “The Risk of Suicide in Patients with Bipolar Disorders,” Journal
of Clinical Psychiatry, 60 (Suppl. 2) (1999): 53–56.
26 Individuals with mood disorders: E. Vieta, E. Nieto, C. Gastó, and E.
Cirera, “Serious Suicide Attempts in Affective Patients,” Journal of
Affective Disorders, 24 (1992): 147–152.
27 For those with mood disorders: A. R. Beisser and J. E. Blanchette, “A

Study of Suicides in a Mental Hospital,” Diseases of the Nervous System,
22 (1961): 365–369; K. A. Achté, A. Stenback, and H. Teravainen, “On
Suicides Committed During Treatment in Psychiatric Hospitals,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 42 (1966): 272–284.
28 Mild or moderate depressions: J. R. Morrison, “Suicide in a Psychiatric
Practice Population,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 43 (1982): 348–352;
R. L. Martin, C. R. Cloninger, and S. B. Guze, “Mortality in a Follow-up of
500 Psychiatric Outpatients: I. Total Mortality,” Archives of General
Psychiatry, 42 (1985): 47–54; G. W. Blair-West, G. W. Mellsop, and M. L.
Eyeson-Annan, 
“Down-Rating 
Lifetime 
Suicide 
Risk 
in 
Major
Depression,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 95 (1997): 259–263.
29 Swedish researchers: O. Hagnell, J. Lanke, and B. Rorsman, “Suicide
Rates in the Lundby Study: Mental Illness as a Risk Factor for Suicide,”
Neuropsychobiology; 7 (1981): 248–253.
30 The severity of depression: T. L. Dorpat and H. S. Ripley, “A Study of
Suicide in the Seattle Area,” Comprehensive Psychiatry, 1 (1960): 349–
359; M. Arato, E. Demeter, Z. Rihmer, and E. Somogyi, “Retrospective
Psychiatric Assessment of 200 Suicides in Budapest,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 77 (1988): 454–456; M. M. Henriksson, H. M. Aro, M. J.
Marttunen, et al., “Mental Disorders and Comorbidity in Suicide,”
American Journal of Psychiatry, 150 (1993): 935–940; E. T. Isometsä, M.
M. Henriksson, H. M. Aro, M. E. Heikkinen, K. I. Kuoppasalmi, and J. K.
Lönnqvist, “Suicide in Major Depression,” American Journal of Psychiatry,
151 (1994): 530–536; S. C. Dilsaver, Y.-W. Chen, A. C. Swann, A. M.
Shoaib, and K. J. Krajewski, “Suicidality in Patients with Pure and
Depressive Mania,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 151 (1994): 1312–
1315.
31 Suicide appears to be: D. L. Dunner, E. S. Gershon, and F. K. Goodwin,
“Heritable Factors in the Severity of Affective Illness,” Biological
Psychiatry, 11 (1976): 31–42; M. T. Tsuang, “Suicide in Schizophrenics,
Manics, Depressives, and Surgical Controls,” Archives of General
Psychiatry, 35 (1978): 153–155; T. H. McGlashan, “Chestnut Lodge
Follow-up Study: III. Long-Term Outcome of Schizophrenia and Affective
Disorders,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 41 (1984): 586–601; J.
Endicott, J. Nee, N. Andreasen, P. Clayton, M. Keller and W. Coryell,
“Bipolar II: Combine or Keep Separate?” Journal of Affective Disorders, 8
(1985): 17–28; R. L. Martin, C. R. Cloninger, S. B. Guze, and P. Clayton,
“Mortality in a Follow-up of 500 Psychiatric Outpatients,” Archives of

General Psychiatry, 42 (1985): 58–66; A. Weeke and M. Vaeth, “Excessive
Mortality of Bipolar and Unipolar (Manic-Depressive) Patients,” Journal of
Affective Disorders, 11 (1986): 227–234; Z. Rihmer, J. Barsi, M. Arató, and
E. Demeter, “Suicide in Subtypes of Primary Major Depression,” Journal of
Affective Disorders, 18 (1990): 221–225; S. C. Newman and R. C. Bland,
“Suicide Risk Varies by Subtype of Affective Disorder,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 83 (1991): 420–426.
32 more common in major depression: S. B. Guze and E. Robins, “Suicide
and Primary Affective Disorders,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 117
(1970): 437–438; G. Winokur and M. Tsuang, “The Iowa 500: Suicide in
Mania, Depression, and Schizophrenia,” American Journal of Psychiatry,
132 (1975): 650–651; W. Coryell, R. Noyes, and J. Clancy, “Excess
Mortality in Panic Disorder: A Comparison with Primary Unipolar
Depression,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 39 (1982): 701–703; M.
Berglund and K. Nilsson, “Mortality in Severe Depression,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 76 (1987): 372–380; D. W. Black, G. Winokur,
and A. Nasrallah, “Suicide in Subtypes of Major Affective Disorder: A
Comparison with General Population Suicide Mortality,” Archives of
General Psychiatry, 44 (1987): 878–880; F. K. Goodwin and K. R.
Jamison, Manic-Depressive Illness (New York: Oxford University Press,
1990).
33 “The patients, therefore”: E. Kraepelin, Manic-Depressive Insanity and
Paranoia, trans. R. M. Barclay, ed. G. M. Robertson (New York: Arno
Press, 1976; first published 1921), p. 25.
34 Paranoia, extreme irascibility: J. Himmelhoch, D. Mulla, J. F. Neil, T. P.
Detre, and D. J. Kupfer, “Incidence and Significance of Mixed Affective
States in a Bipolar Population,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 33 (1976):
1062–1066; F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison, Manic-Depressive Illness
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1990); S. L. McElroy, P. E. Keck, H.
G. Pope, J. I. Hudson, G. L. Faedda, and A. C. Swann, “Clinical and
Research Implications of the Diagnosis of Dysphoric or Mixed Mania or
Hypomania,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 149 (1992): 1633–1644.
35 “I walk from room to room”: Anne Sexton, handwritten notes dated
“February 16th or so [probably 1957],” Dr. Orne file, restricted collection;
quoted in Diane Wood Middlebrook, Anne Sexton: A Biography (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1991), p. 36.
36 “I went to bed & wept”: Edgar Allan Poe, letter to Annie L. Richmond,

November 16, 1848, in John Wand Ostrom, ed., The Letters of Edgar Allan
Poe, vol. 2 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1948), pp. 401–
403.
37 Mixed states: G. R. Jameison, “Suicide and Mental Disease: A Clinical
Analysis of One Hundred Cases,” Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry, 36
(1936): 1–12; K. R. Jamison, “Suicide and Bipolar Disorders,” Annals of
New York Academy of Sciences, 487 (1986): 301–315; S. C. Silsaver, Y.-W.
Chen, A. C. Swann, A. M. Shoaib, and K. J. Krajewski, “Suicidality in
Patients with Pure and Depressive Mania,” American Journal of Psychiatry,
151 (1994): 1312–1315; S. M. Strakowski, S. L. McElroy, P. E. Keck, and
S. A. West, American Journal of Psychiatry, 153 (1996): 674–676; J. F.
Goldberg, J. L. Garno, A. C. Leon, J. H. Kocsis, and L. Portera,
“Association of Recurrent Suicidal Ideation with Nonremission from Acute
Mixed Mania,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 155 (1998): 1753–1755.
38 “The patient cannot”: Kraepelin, Manic-Depressive Insanity and
Paranoia, pp. 64–65, 164.
39 Psychosis, the presence: D. W. Goodwin, P. Alderson, and R. Rosenthal,
“Clinical Significance of Hallucinations in Psychiatric Disorders,” Archives
of General Psychiatry, 24 (1971): 76–80; W. Coryell and M. T. Tsuang,
“Primary Unipolar Depression and the Prognostic Importance of
Delusions,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 39 (1982): 1181–1184; D. E.
Frangos, G. Athanassenas, S. Tsitourides, P. Psilolignos, and N. Katsanou,
“Psychotic Depressive Disorder: A Separate Entity?” Journal of Affective
Disorders, 5 (1983): 259–265; S. P. Roose, A. H. Glassman, B. T. Walsh, S.
Woodring, and J. Vital-Herne, “Depression, Delusions, and Suicide,”
American Journal of Psychiatry, 140 (1983): 1159–1162; M. Wolfersdorf,
F. Keller, B. Steiner, and G. Hole, “Delusional Depression and Suicide,”
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 76 (1987): 359–363; D. W. Black, G.
Winokur, and A. Nasrallah, “Effect of Psychosis on Suicide Risk in 1,593
Patients with Unipolar and Bipolar Affective Disorders,” American Journal
of Psychiatry, 145 (1988): 849–852; C. L. Rich, M. S. Motooka, R. C.
Fowler, and D. Young, “Suicide by Psychotics,” Biological Psychiatry, 23
(1988): 595–601; J. F. Westermeyer, M. Harrow, and J. T. Marengo, “Risk
for Suicide in Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic and Nonpsychotic
Disorders,” Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 179 (1991): 259–266;
K. J. Kaplan and M. Harrow, “Positive and Negative Symptoms as Risk
Factors for Later Suicidal Activity in Schizophrenics Versus Depressives,”
Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 26 (1996): 105–121; P. E. Quinlan,

C. A. King, G. L. Hanna, and N. Ghaziuddin, “Psychotic Versus
Nonpsychotic Depression in Hospitalized Adolescents,” Depression and
Anxiety, 6 (1997): 40–42.
40 depressed patients with auditory hallucinations: D. Hellerstein, W.
Frosch, and H. W. Koenigsberg, “The Clinical Significance of Command
Hallucinations,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 144 (1987): 219–221.
41 Psychotic patients do, however: E. Isometsä, M. Henriksson, H. Aro, M.
Heikkinen, K. Kuoppasalmi, and J. Lönnqvist, “Suicide in Psychotic Major
Depression,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 3 (1994): 187–191.
42 People with depression or manic-depression: G. R. Jameison, “Suicide
and Mental Disease: A Clinical Analysis of One Hundred Cases,” Archives
of Neurology and Psychiatry, 36 (1936): 1–12; S. Guze and E. Robins,
“Suicide and Primary Affective Disorders,” British Journal of Psychiatry,
117 (1970): 437–438; J. B. Copas, D. L. Freeman-Browne, and A. A.
Robin, “Danger Periods for Suicide in Patients Under Treatment,”
Psychological Medicine, 1 (1971): 400–404; M. T. Tsuang and R. F.
Woolson, “Excess Mortality in Schizophrenia and Affective Disorders,”
Archives of General Psychiatry, 35 (1978): 1181–1185; G. F. Johnson and
G. Hunt, “Suicidal Behavior in Bipolar Manic-Depressive Patients and
Their Families,” Comprehensive Psychiatry, 20 (1979): 159–164; A.
Weeke, “Causes of Death in Manic-Depressives,” in M. Schou and E.
Strömgren, eds., Origin, Prevention and Treatment of Affective Disorders
(London: Academic Press, 1979), pp. 289–299; A. Roy, “Risk Factors for
Suicide in Psychiatric Patients,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 39 (1982):
1089–1095; D. W. Black, G. Winokur, and A. Nasrallah, “Mortality in
Patients with Primary Unipolar Depression, Secondary Unipolar
Depression, and Bipolar Affective Disorder: A Comparison with General
Population Mortality,” International Journal of Psychiatry and Medicine,
17 (1987): 351–360; J. Fawcett, W. Scheftner, D. Clark, D. Hedeker, R.
Gibbons, and W. Coryell, “Clinical Predictors of Suicide in Patients with
Major Affective Disorders: A Controlled Prospective Study,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 144 (1987): 35–40; D. W. Black, “The Iowa Record-
Linkage Experience,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 19 (1989):
78–89; A. Roy, “Features Associated with Suicide Attempts in Depression:
A Partial Replication,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 27 (1993): 35–38; B.
Ahrens, A. Berghöfer, T. Wolf, and B. Müller-Oerlinghausen, “Suicide
Attempts, Age and Duration of Illness in Recurrent Affective Disorders,”
Journal of Affective Disorders, 36 (1995): 43–49; H. Brodaty, C. M.

MacCuspie-Moore, L. Tickle, and G. Lusocombe, “Depression, Diagnostic
Sub-Type and Death: A 25-Year Followup Study,” Journal of Affective
Disorders, 46 (1997): 233–242.
43 one of the highest-risk periods: Sir T. S. Clouston, Clinical Lectures on
Mental Disease, 5th ed. (London: Churchill, 1898); J. Barfield Adams,
“Suicide—From a General Practitioner’s Point of View,” The Practitioner,
44 (1915): 470–478; D. K. Henderson and R. D. Gillespie, A Textbook of
Psychiatry (London: Oxford University Press, 1927); E. Stengel, “The Risk
of Suicide in States of Depression,” Medical Press, 234 (1955): 182–184; J.
B. Copes, D. L. Freeman-Browne, and A. A. Robin, “Danger Periods for
Suicide in Patients Under Treatment,” Psychological Medicine, 1 (1971):
400–404; J. B. Copas and M. J. Fryer, “Density Estimation and Suicide
Risk in Psychiatric Treatment,” Statistical Society, 143 (1980): 167–176; P.
Barner-Rasmussen, “Suicide in Psychiatric Patients in Denmark, 1971–
1981: II. Hospitalization Utilization and Risk Groups,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 73 (1986): 449–455; E. Schweizer, A. Dever, and C. Clary,
“Suicide upon Recovery from Depression: A Clinical Note,” Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 176 (1988): 633–636.
44 “We should be careful”: Benjamin Rush, Medical Inquiries and
Observations upon the Diseases of the Mind (Philadelphia: Kimber &
Richardson, 1812), pp. 239–240.
45 “The electricity manifests itself”: Michael Hurd, The Ordeal of Ivor
Gurney (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1984), p. 158.
46 “There is a dreadful hell”: “To God,” ll. 8–9, 12, in P. J. Kavanagh, ed.,
Collected Poems of Ivor Gurney (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1984),
p. 156.
47 “There is one who all day”: from “An Appeal for Death,” ll. 1, 22, in
Kavanagh, ed., Collected Poems of Ivor Gurney, pp. 181–182.
48 Schizophrenia is the most severe: R. J. Wyatt, R. C. Alexander, M. F.
Egan, and D. G. Kirch, “Schizophrenia: Just the Facts. What Do We Know?
How Well Do We Know It? Schizophrenia Research, 1 (1988): 3–18; L. N.
Robins and D. A. Regier, eds. Psychiatric Disorders in America: The
Epidemiologic Catchment Area Study (New York: Free Press, 1991);
American Psychiatric Association, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, 4th ed. (Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric
Association, 1994); I. I. Gottesman, “Complications to the Complex
Inheritance of Schizophrenia,” Clinical Genetics, 46 (1994): 116–123; P.

Asherson, R. Mant, and P. McGuffin, “Genetics and Schizophrenia,” in S.
R. Hirsch and D. R. Weinberger, Schizophrenia (Oxford: Blackwell
Science, 1995), pp. 253–274.
49 It is malevolent: A. Roy, “Suicide in Schizophrenia,” in A. Roy, ed.,
Suicide (Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1986), pp. 97–112; C. B. Caldwell
and I. I. Gottesman, “Schizophrenia—A High-Risk Factor for Suicide:
Clues to Risk Reduction,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 22
(1992): 479–493.
50 death’s heads: Emil Kraepelin, Dementia Praecox and Paraphrenia,
trans. R. M. Barclay, ed. G. M. Robertson (Huntington, N.Y.: Robert E.
Krieger, 1971; first published in English 1919), p. 14.
51 “I lay motionless”: Carol S. North, Welcome, Silence: My Triumph over
Schizophrenia (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1987), p. 116.
52 “The reality for myself”: R. Bayley, “First Person Account:
Schizophrenia,” Schizophrenia Bulletin, 22 (1996): 727–729.
53 For many, mood is also affected: S. G. Siris, “Depression and
Schizophrenia,” in S. R. Hirsch and D. R. Weinberger, Schizophrenia
(Oxford: Blackwell Science, 1995), pp. 128–145.
54 at least one in four: R. E. Drake and P. G. Cotton, “Depression,
Hopelessness and Suicide in Chronic Schizophrenia,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 148 (1986): 554–559; A. A. Salama, “Depression and Suicide
in Schizophrenic Patients,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 18
(1988): 379–384; K. K. Cheng, C. M. Leung, W. H. Lo, and T. H. Lam,
“Risk Factors of Suicide Among Schizophrenics,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 81 (1990): 220–224; A. M. Dassori, J. E. Mezzich, and M.
Keshavan, “Suicidal Indicators in Schizophrenia,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 81 (1990): 409–413; J. S. Jones, D. J. Stein, B. Stanley, J. R.
Guido, R. Winchel, and M. Stanley, “Negative and Depressive Symptoms
in Suicidal Schizophrenics,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 89 (1994):
81–87; H. Heilä, E. Isometsä, M. M. Henriksson, M. E. Heikkinen, M. J.
Marttunen, and J. K. Lönnqvist, “Suicide and Schizophrenia: A Nationwide
Psychological Autopsy Study on Age- and Sex-Specific Clinical
Characteristics of 92 Suicide Victims with Schizophrenia,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 154 (1997): 1235–1242; C. D. Rossau and P. B.
Mortensen, “Risk Factors for Suicide in Patients with Schizophrenia:
Nested Case-Control Study,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 171 (1997):
355–359.

55 intensely irritable, and restless: P. E. Yarden, “Observations on Suicide
in Chronic Schizophrenia,” Comprehensive Psychiatry, 15 (1974): 325–
333; C. W. Dingman and T. H. McGlashan, “Discriminating Characteristics
of Suicide,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 74 (1986): 91–97; D. G.
Wilkinson, “The Suicide Rate in Schizophrenia,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 140 (1982): 138–141; P. Allebeck, A. Varla, E. Kristjansson,
and B. Wistedt, “Risk Factors for Suicide Among Patients with
Schizophrenia,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 76 (1987): 414–419; A.
M. Dassori, J. E. Mezzich, and M. Keshavan, “Suicidal Indicators in
Schizophrenia,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 81 (1990): 409–413.
56 30 to 40 percent: A. Roy, “Suicide in Schizophrenia,” in A. Roy, ed.,
Suicide (Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1986), pp. 97–112; L. N. Robins
and D. A. Regier, eds., Psychiatric Disorders in America: The
Epidemiologic Catchment Area Study (New York: Free Press, 1991); C. B.
Caldwell and I. I. Gottesman, “Schizophrenia—A High-Risk Factor for
Suicide: Clues to Risk Reduction,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior,
22 (1992): 479–493; R. Chatterton, “Parasuicide in People with
Schizophrenia,” Australian and New Zealand Journal of Mental Health
Nursing, 4 (1995): 83–86; G. L. Haas, “Suicidal Behavior in
Schizophrenia,” in R. W. Maris, M. M. Silverman, and S. S. Canetto, eds.,
Review of Suicidology, 1997 (New York: Guilford, 1997), pp. 202–236
57 the single best predictor: J. W. Shaffer, S. Perlin, C. W. Schmidt, and J.
H. Stephens, “The Prediction of Suicide in Schizophrenia,” Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 159 (1974): 349–355; G. Wilkinson and N.
A. Bacon, “A Clinical and Epidemiological Survey of Parasuicide and
Suicide in Edinburgh Schizophrenics,” Psychological Medicine, 14 (1984):
899–912; P. Allebeck, A. Varla, E. Kristjansson, and B. Wistedt, “Risk
Factors for Suicide Among Patients with Schizophrenia,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 76 (1987): 414–419; G. L. Haas, “Suicidal Behavior in
Schizophrenia,” in R. W. Maris, M. M. Silverman, and S. S. Canetto, eds.
Review of Suicidology (New York: Guilford, 1997), pp. 202–236. Roy,
“Suicide in Schizophrenia.”
58 in the early stages: M. T. Tsuang and R. F. Woolson, “Excess Mortality
in Schizophrenia and Affective Disorders,” Archives of General Psychiatry,
35 (1978): 1181–1185; D. W. Black and G. Winokur, “Prospective Studies
of Suicide and Mortality in Psychiatric Patients,” Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 487 (1986): 106–113; C. A. Johns, M. Stanley, and B.
Stanley, “Suicide in Schizophrenia,” Annals of the New York Academy of

Sciences, 487 (1986): 294–300; D. Wiersma, F. J. Nienhuis, C. J. Slooff,
and R. Giel, “Natural Course of Schizophrenic Disorders: A 15-Year
Followup of a Dutch Incidence Cohort,” Schizophrenia Bulletin, 24 (1998):
75–85.
59 recently released: G. S. Stein, “Dangerous Episodes Occurring Around
the Time of Discharge of Four Chronic Schizophrenics,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 141 (1982): 586–589; Roy, “Suicide in Schizophrenia”; D. W.
Black and R. Fisher, “Mortality in DSM-III-R Schizophrenia,”
Schizophrenia Research, 7 (1992): 109–116; C. D. Rossau and P. B.
Mortensen, “Risk Factors for Suicide in Patients with Schizophrenia:
Nested Case-Control Study,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 171 (1997):
355–359.
60 Although hallucinations and delusions: A. Breier and B. M. Astrachan,
“Characterization of Schizophrenic Patients Who Commit Suicide,”
American Journal of Psychiatry, 141 (1984): 206–209; G. Wilkinson and
N. A. Bacon, “A Clinical and Epidemiological Survey of Parasuicide and
Suicide in Edinburgh Schizophrenics,” Psychological Medicine, 14 (1984):
899–912; Roy, “Suicide in Schizophrenia”; D. Hellerstein, W. Frosch, and
H. 
W. 
Koenigsberg, 
“The 
Clinical 
Significance 
of 
Command
Hallucinations,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 144 (1987): 219–221; K.
J. Kaplan and M. Harrow, “Positive and Negative Symptoms as Risk
Factors for Later Suicidal Activity in Schizophrenics Versus Depressives,”
Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 26 (1996): 105–121; W. S. Fenton,
T. H. McGlashan, B. J. Victor, and C. R. Blyler, “Symptoms, Subtype, and
Suicidality in Patients with Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 154 (1997): 199–204.
61 Although the eating disorders: D. B. Herzog, M. B. Keller, and P. W.
Lavori, “Outcome in Anorexia Nervosa and Bulimia Nervosa: A Review of
the Literature,” Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 176 (1988): 131–
143; E. D. Eckert, K. A. Halmi, P. Marchi, et al., “Ten-Year Follow-up of
Anorexia Nervosa: Clinical Course and Outcome,” Psychological
Medicine, 25 (1995): 143–156.
62 A review of more than thirty studies: A. Gardner and C. Rich, “Eating
Disorders and Suicide,” in R. Yufit, ed., Proceedings of the 21st Annual
Meeting of the American Association of Suicidology (Denver: American
Association of Suicidology, 1988), pp. 171–172; P. K. Keel, J. E. Mitchell,
K. B. Miller, T. L. Davis, and S. J. Crow, “Long-Term Outcome of Bulimia
Nervosa,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 56 (1999): 63–69.

63 Anxiety disorders, on the other hand: J. Fawcett, W. A. S. Scheftner, L.
Fogg, D. C. Clark, M. A. Young, D. Hedeker, and R. Gibbons, “Time-
Related Predictors of Suicide in Major Affective Disorder,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 147 (1990): 1189–1194; E. C. Harris and B.
Barraclough, “Suicide as an Outcome for Mental Disorders: A Meta-
Analysis,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 170 (1997): 205–228.
64 The defining symptoms: P. J. Clayton, W. M. Grove, W. Coryell, et al.,
“Follow-up and Family Study of Anxious Depression,” American Journal
of Psychiatry, 148 (1991): 1512–1517.
65 Panic attacks are also: M. M. Weissman, G. L. Klerman, J. S.
Markowitz, and R. Ouellette, “Suicidal Ideation and Suicide Attempts in
Panic Disorder and Attacks,” New England Journal of Medicine, 321
(1989): 1209–1214; M. G. Warshaw, A. O. Massion, L. G. Peterson, L. A.
Pratt, and M. B. Keller, “Suicidal Behavior in Patients with Panic Disorder:
Retrospective and Prospective Data,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 34
(1994): 235–247; C. D. Horning and R. J. McNally, “Panic Disorder and
Suicide Attempt: A Reanalysis of Data from the Epidemiologic Catchment
Area Study,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 167 (1995): 76–79; M. M.
Weissman, “Comorbidity and Suicide Risk,” British Journal of Psychiatry,
167 (1995): 819–820; E. C. Harris and B. Barraclough, “Suicide as an
Outcome for Mental Disorders: A Meta-Analysis,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 170 (1997): 205–228.
66 Severe anxiety: J. Fawcett, W. A. S. Scheftner, L. Fogg, D. C. Clark, M.
A. Young, D. Hedeker, and R. Gibbons, “Time-Related Predictors of
Suicide in Major Affective Disorder,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 147
(1990): 1189–1194.
67 suicide is rare: N. L. Gittleson, “The Relationship Between Obsessions
and Suicidal Attempts in Depressive Psychosis,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 112 (1966): 889–890; C. M. Rosenberg, “Complications of
Obsessional Neurosis,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 114 (1968): 477–478;
R. A. Woodruff, P. J. Clayton, and S. B. Guze, “Suicide Attempts and
Psychiatric Diagnosis,” Diseases of the Nervous System, 33 (1972): 617–
621; C. E. Hollingsworth, P. E. Tanguay, L. Grossman, and P. Pabst, “Long-
Term Outcome of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder in Childhood,” Journal
of the American Academy of Child Psychiatry, 19 (1980): 134–144; W.
Coryell, R. Noyes, and D. House, “Mortality Among Outpatients with
Anxiety Disorders,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 143 (1986): 508–510.

68 unless it is extremely severe: E. Kringlen, “Obsessional Neurotics: A
Long-Term Follow-Up,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 111 (1965): 709–
722; P. Hay, P. Sachdev, S. Cumming, et al., “Treatment of Obsessive-
Compulsive Disorder by Psychosurgery,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica,
87 (1993): 197–207.
69 Impulsivity and violence: M. R. Fryer, A. J. Frances, T. Sullivan, S. W.
Hurt, and J. Clarkin, “Suicide Attempts in Patients with Borderline
Personality Disorder,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 145 (1988): 737–
739; B.-A. Armelius and G. Kullgren, “Pc-Modelling as an Instrument to
Identify Patterns of Traits and Behaviors Associated with Completed
Suicide in Borderline Personality Disorder,” in G. Kullgren, ed., Clinical
Studies on the Borderline Concept with Special Reference to Suicidal
Behavior (Umeå, Sweden: Umeå University Medical Dissertations, 1987),
p. 204, cited in B. Runeson and J. Beskow, “Borderline Personality
Disorder in Young Swedish Suicides,” Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease, 179 (1991): 153–156; D. A. Brent, B. Johnson, S. Bartle, et al.,
“Personality Disorder, Tendency to Impulsive Violence, and Suicidal
Behavior in Adolescents,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 32 (1993): 69–75; B. S. Brodsky, K. M. Malone, S.
P. Ellis, R. A. Dulit, and J. J. Mann, “Characteristics of Borderline
Personality Disorder Associated with Suicidal Behavior,” American Journal
of Psychiatry, 154 (1997): 1715–1719; A. T. A. Cheng, A. H. Mann, and K.
A. Chan, “Personality Disorder and Suicide: A Case-Control Study,” British
Journal of Psychiatry, 170 (1997): 441–446.
70 When the unstable elements: M. R. Fryer, A. J. Frances, T. Sullivan, S.
W. Hurt, and J. Clarkin, “Suicide Attempts in Patients with Borderline
Personality Disorder,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 145 (1988): 737–
739; E. M. Corbitt, K. M. Malone, G. L. Haas, and J. J. Mann, “Suicidal
Behavior with Minor Depression and Comorbid Personality Disorders,”
Journal of Affective Disorders, 39 (1996): 61–72; E. T. Isometsä, M. M.
Henriksson, M. E. Heikkinen, H. M. Aro, M. J. Marttunen, K. I.
Kuoppasalmi, and J. K. Lönnqvist, “Suicide Among Subjects with
Personality Disorders,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 153 (1996): 667–
673; M. H. Stone, “Paradoxes in the Management of Suicidality in
Borderline Patients,” American Journal of Psychotherapy, 47 (1993): 255–
272; P. H. Soloff, “Risk Factors for Suicidal Behavior in Borderline
Personality Disorder,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 151 (1994): 1316–
1323; J. Davis, P. Janicak, and F. Ayd, “Psychopharmacotherapy of the

Personality-Disordered Patient,” Psychiatric Annals, 25 (1995): 614–620.
71 Nearly three-quarters: T. H. McGlashan. “The Chesnut Lodge Follow-up
Study: III. Long-Term Outcome of Borderline Personalities,” Archives of
General Psychiatry, 43 (1986): 2–30; J. Paris, R. Brown, and D. Nowlis,
“Long-Term Follow-up of Borderline Patients in a General Hospital,”
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 28 (1987): 530–535; M. H. Stone, D. K. Stone,
and S. Hurt, “The Natural History of Borderline Patients Treated by
Intensive Hospitalization,” Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 10
(1987): 185–206.
72 more than 40 percent: B. S. Runeson, J. Beskow, and M. Waern, “The
Suicidal Process in Suicides Among Young People,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 93 (1996): 35–42.
73 “During the first hours”: H. A. Wishnie, “Inpatient Therapy with
Borderline Patients,” in J. E. Mack, ed., Borderline States in Psychiatry
(New York: Grune & Straton, 1975), pp. 47–48.
74 The reasons for this: P. M. Marzuk and J. J. Mann, “Suicide and
Substance Abuse,” Psychiatric Annals, 18 (1988): 639–646.
75 Alcohol and drugs, used: T. W. Estroff and M. S. Gold, “Medical and
Psychiatric Complications of Cocaine Abuse with Possible Points of
Pharmacological Treatment,” Advances in Alcohol and Substance Abuse, 5
(1986): 61–76; J. M. Himmelhoch and M. E. Garfinkel, “Sources of
Lithium Resistance in Mixed Mania,” Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 22
(1986): 613–620; F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison, Manic-Depressive
Illness (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990).
76 mental illness usually precedes: D. B. Kandel and M. Davies, “Adult
Sequelae of Adolescent Depressive Syndromes,” Archives of General
Psychiatry, 43 (1986): 255–262; K. A. Christie, J. D. Burke, D. A. Regier,
D. S. Rae, J. H. Boyd, and B. Z. Locke, “Epidemiologic Evidence for Early
Onset of Mental Disorders and Higher Risk of Drug Abuse in Young
Adults,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 145 (1988): 971–75; R. C.
Kessler, “The National Comorbidity Survey: Preliminary Results and
Future Directions,” International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric
Research, 5 (1995): 139–151; R. C. Kessler, C. B. Nelson, K. A.
McGonagle, M. J. Edlund, R. G. Frank, and P. J. Leaf, “The Epidemiology
of Co-Occurring Addictive and Mental Disorders: Implications for
Prevention and Service Utilization,” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry,
50 (1996): 36–43.

77 “I am constitutionally sensitive”: J. W. Robertson, Edgar A. Poe: A
Psychopathic Study (New York: G. P. Putnam, 1923), p. 82.
78 Two of every three: L. N. Robins and D. A. Regier, eds., Psychiatric
Disorders in America (New York: Free Press, 1991).
79 those who are both: P. Nicholls, G. Edwards, and E. Kyle, “Alcoholics
Admitted to Four Hospitals in England: General and Cause-Specific
Mortality,” Quarterly Journal Studies of Alcohol, 35 (1974): 841–855; M.
Berglund, “Suicide in Alcoholism,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 41
(1984): 888–891; A. C. Whitters, R. J. Cadoret, and R. B. Widmer, “Factors
Associated with Suicide Attempts in Alcohol Abusers,” Journal of Affective
Disorders, 9 (1985): 19–23; D. W. Black, W. Yates, F. Potty, R. Noyes, and
K. Brown, “Suicidal Behavior in Alcoholic Males,” Comprehensive
Psychiatry, 27 (1986): 227–233; A. Roy and M. Linnoila, “Alcoholism and
Suicide,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 16 (1986): 244–273; M.
A. Schuckit, “Primary Men Alcoholics with Histories of Suicide Attempts,”
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 47 (1986): 78–81; G. Winokur and D. W.
Black, “Psychiatric and Medical Diagnoses as Risk Factors for Mortality in
Psychiatric Patients: A Case-Control Study,” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 144 (1987): 208–211; D. Hasin, B. Grant, and J. Endicott,
“Treated and Untreated Suicide Attempts in Substance Abuse Patients,”
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 176 (1988): 289–294; M.
Hesselbrock, V. Hesselbrock, K. Syzmanski, and M. Weidenman, “Suicide
Attempts and Alcoholism,” Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 49 (1988): 436–
442; M. M. Henriksson, H. M. Aro, M. J. Marttunen, M. E. Heikkinen, E.
T. Isometsä, K. I. Kuoppasalmi, and J. K. Lönnqvist, “Mental Disorders and
Comorbidity in Suicide,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 150 (1993):
935–940; M. D. Rudd, P. F. Dahm, and M. H. Rajals, “Diagnostic
Comorbidity in Persons with Suicidal Ideation and Behavior,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 150 (1993): 928–934; E. Johnsson and M. Fridell,
“Suicide Attempts in a Cohort of Drug Abusers: A 5-Year Follow-Up
Study,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 96 (1997): 362–366; L. Tondo, R.
J. Baldessarini, J. Hennen, G. P. Minnai, P. Salis, L. Scamonatti, M. Masia,
C. Ghiani, and P. Mannu, “Suicide Attempts in Major Affective Disorder
Patients with Comorbid Substance Use Disorders,” Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry (Suppl. 2) (1999): 63–69.
80 “He knew he was standing”: John Berryman, cited in Paul Mariani,
Dream Song: The Life of John Berryman (New York: William Morrow,
1990), pp. 466–467.

5 • WHAT MATTERS IT, IF ROPE OR GARTER
1 “Since we can die”: Thomas Chatterton, “Suicide.” Chatterton (1752–
1770), an English poet, wrote “Suicide” a few months before he swallowed
a fatal dose of arsenic. “Cease my anguish’d soul,” he wrote not long before
he died, “And this last act of wretchedness forgive.” He was seventeen.
2 “In whatever direction”: Seneca, “To Norvatus on Anger” (III. xv. 3–
xvi.), p. 295.
3 “He plunged a dagger”: S. B. Nuland, How We Die: Reflections on Life’s
Final Chapter (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1994), p. 158.
4 “Razors pain you”: D. Parker, The Poetry and Short Stories of Dorothy
Parker (New York: Modern Library, 1994), p. 62.
5 “When Dorothy was sufficiently recovered”: M. Meade, Dorothy Parker:
What Fresh Hell Is This? (New York: Penguin USA, 1989), p. 107.
6 “I know a hundred ways to die”: Edna St. Vincent Millay, Collected
Poems, ed. Norma Millay (New York: Harper & Row, 1956), p. 264.
7 called his servant: Forbes Winslow, The Anatomy of Suicide (London: H.
Renshaw, 1840; reprinted by Longwood Press, Boston, 1978), p. 298.
8 drinking boiling water: J. P. Gray, “Suicide,” American Journal of
Insanity, 35 (1878): 37–73, p. 66.
9 One of Karl Menninger’s patients: K. A. Menninger, “Psychoanalytic
Aspects of Suicide,” International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 14 (1933):
376–390.
10 “four spoons, three knives”: Henry Romilly Fedden, Suicide: A Social
and Historical Study (London: Peter Davies, 1938), p. 305.
11 there have been several reports: R. J. Frances, T. Wikstrom, and V.
Alcena, “Contracting AIDS as a Means of Committing Suicide,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 142 (1985): 656; D. K. Flavin, J. E. Franklin, and R.
J. Frances, “The Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) and
Suicidal Behavior in Alcohol-Dependent Homosexual Men,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 143 (1986): 1440–1442.
12 This baffling endgame: A. Feuer, “Drawing a Bead on a Baffling
Endgame: Suicide by Cop,” New York Times, June 21, 1998.
13 “The cuckolded householder”: Thomas Lynch, The Undertaking: Life
Studies from the Dismal Trade (London: Jonathan Cape, 1997), p. 173.
14 Anton van Hooff: A. van Hooff, From Autothanasia to Suicide: Self-

Killing in Classical Antiquity (London: Routledge, 1990).
15 “To die were best”: Euripides, “Helena,” ll. 298–303.
16 By the late nineteenth century: E. Morselli, Suicide: An Essay on
Comparative Moral Statistics (London: Kegan Paul, 1881): E. Durkheim,
Suicide: A Study in Sociology, trans. J. A. Spaulding and G. Simpson (New
York: Free Press, 1951; first published 1897).
17 “The calm, / Cool face”: Langston Hughes, “Suicide’s Note,” in A.
Rampersad and D. Roessel, eds., The Collected Poems of Langston Hughes
(New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1994), p. 55.
18 “Thus,” wrote sociologist: Durkheim, Suicide: A Study in Sociology, p.
290.
19 “Even away from their own country”: Morselli, Suicide: An Essay on
Comparative Moral Statistics, p. 327.
20 English, Scottish, and Irish immigrants: P. Burvill, M. McCall, T.
Woodings, and N. Stenhouse, “Comparison of Suicide Rates and Methods
in English, Scots and Irish Immigrants in Australia,” Social Science and
Medicine, 17 (1983): 705–708.
21 In Belgium, for example: G. F. G. Moens, M. J. M. Loysch, and H. van
de Voorde, “The Geographical Pattern of Methods of Suicide in Belgium:
Implications for Prevention,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 77 (1988):
320–327.
22 Poisoning and hanging: R. Desjarlais, L. Eisenberg, B. Good, and A.
Kleinman, World Mental Health: Problems and Priorities in Low-Income
Countries (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995).
23 a study of suicide methods: D. Lester, “Changes in the Methods Used for
Suicide in 16 Countries from 1960 to 1980,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 81 (1990): 260–261.
24 “The first thing I considered”: Quoted by M. Iga, The Thorn in the
Chrysanthemum: Suicide and Economic Success in Modern Japan
(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1986), pp. 82–
83.
25 Freud conjectured: S. Freud, “The Psychogenesis of a Case of
Homosexuality in a Woman,” The Standard Edition of the Complete
Psychological Works, trans. and ed. J. Strachey (London: Hogarth Press,
1955), vol. 18, pp. 147–172.
26 Personality traits: D. Lester, “Factors Affecting Choice of Method for

Suicide,” Journal of Clinical Psychology, 26 (1970): 437; D. Lester,
“Personality Correlates Associated with Choice of Method for Suicide,”
Personality, 1 (1970): 261–264; D. Lester, “Choice of Method for Suicide
and Personality: A Study of Suicide Notes,” Omega, 2 (1971): 76–80; N.
Lukianowicz, “Suicidal Behavior,” Psychiatrica Clinica, 7 (1974): 159–
171; K. Noreik, “Attempted Suicide and Suicide in Functional Psychoses,”
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 52 (1975): 81–106; D. Lester and A. T.
Beck, “What the Suicide’s Choice of Method Signifies,” Omega, 113
(1980–81): 271–277; D. Lester, “Excitor-Inhibitor Scales of the MMPI and
Choice of Method for Suicide,” Perceptual and Motor Skills, 66 (1988):
218; D. Lester, “Determinants of Choice of Method for Suicide and the
Person/Situation Debate in Psychology,” Perceptual and Motor Skills, 85
(1997): 497–498.
27 The availability of the method: M. Tousignant and B. L. Mishara,
“Suicide and Culture: A Review of the Literature (1979–1980),”
Transcultural Psychiatric Research Review, 18 (1981): 5–32; J. R. Bowles,
“Suicide and Attempted Suicide in Contemporary Western Samoa,” in F. X.
Hezel, D. H. Rubinstein, and G. H. White, eds., Culture, Youth and Suicide
in the Pacific: Papers from an East-West Center Conference (Honolulu:
East-West Center, 1985), pp. 15–35; L. R. Berger, “Suicides and Pesticides
in Sri Lanka,” American Journal of Public Health, 78 (1988): 826–828; W.
H. Lo and T. M. Leung, “Suicide in Hong Kong,” Australian and New
Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 19 (1985): 287–292; K. T. Hau, “Suicide in
Hong Kong 1971–1990: Age Trend, Sex Ratio, and Method of Suicide,”
Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 28 (1993): 23–27; D.
Lester, “Suicide by Jumping in Singapore as a Function of High-Rise
Apartment Availability,” Perceptual and Motor Skills, 79 (1994): 74; R.
Desjarlais, L. Eisenberg, B. Good, and A. Kleinman, World Mental Health:
Problems and Priorities in Low-Income Countries (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1995).
28 potentially lethal medications: D. Jacobsen, K. Frederichsen, K. M.
Knutsen, Y. Sorum, T. Talseth, and O. R. Odegaard, “A Prospective Study
of 1212 Cases of Acute Poisoning: General Epidemiology,” Human
Toxicology, 3 (1984): 93–106; E. Isometsä, M. Henriksson, and J.
Lönnqvist, “Completed Suicide and Recent Lithium Treatment,” Journal of
Affective Disorders, 26 (1992): 101–104; D. Waddington and I. P.
McKenzie, “Overdose Rates in Lithium-Treated Versus Antidepressant-
Treated Outpatients,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 90 (1994): 50–52.

29 Forensic pathologists, for example: C. E. Rhyne, D. I. Templer, L. G.
Brown, and N. B. Peters, “Dimensions of Suicide: Perceptions of Lethality,
Time, and Agony,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 25 (1995): 373–
380.
30 American adolescents: H. E. Harris and W. C. Myers, “Adolescents’
Misconceptions of the Dangerousness of Acetaminophen in Overdose,”
Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 27 (1997): 274–277.
31 One study conducted in the 1970s: A. Marks, “Sex Differences and
Their Effect upon Cultural Evaluations of Methods of Self-Destruction,”
Omega, 8 (1977): 65–70.
32 Fear of disfigurement: D. Lester, “Why Do People Choose Particular
Methods for Suicide?” Activitas Nervosa Superior, 30 (1988): 312–314.
33 Age also plays a role: K. Hawton, M. Osborn. J. O’Grady, et al.
“Classification of Adolescents Who Take Overdoses,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 140 (1982): 124–131; D. A. Brent, “Correlates of Medical
Lethality of Suicide Attempts in Children and Adolescents,” Journal of the
American Academy of Child Psychiatry, 26 (1987): 87–89; M. L.
Rosenberg, J. C. Smith, L. E. Davidson, and J. M. Conn, “The Emergence
of Youth Suicide: An Epidemiologic Analysis and Public Health
Perspective,” Annual Review of Public Health, 8 (1987): 417–440; H. M.
Hoberman and B. D. Garfinkel, “Completed Suicide in Youth,” Canadian
Journal of Psychiatry, 33 (1988): 494–504; I. O’Donnell and R. D. T.
Farmer, “Suicidal Acts on Metro Systems: An International Perspective,”
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 86 (1992): 60–63; J. L. McIntosh,
“Methods of Suicide,” in R. W. Maris, A. L. Berman, J. T. Maltsberger, and
R. I. Yufit, eds., Assessment and Prediction of Suicide (New York: Guilford
Press, 1992), pp. 381–397; Centers for Disease Control, “Suicide Among
Children, Adolescents, and Young Adults—United States, 1980–1992,”
Journal of the American Medical Association, 274 (1995): 451–452; D. De
Leo, D. Conforti, and G. Carollo, “A Century of Suicide in Italy: A
Comparison Between the Old and the Young,” Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior, 27 (1997): 239–249.
34 The type and degree: H. Hendin, “The Psychodynamics of Suicide,”
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 136 (1963): 236–244; F. G.
Guggenheim and A. D. Weisman, “Suicide in the Subway: Publicly
Witnessed Attempts of 50 Cases,” Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
155 (1972): 404–409; K. Lindekilde and A. G. Wang, “Train Suicide in the

County of Fyn 1979–1982,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 72 (1985):
150–154; R. L. Symonds, “Psychiatric Aspects of Railway Fatalities,”
Psychological Medicine, 15 (1985): 609–621; R. Jacobson, M. Jackson, and
M. Berelowitz, “Self-Incineration: A Controlled Comparison of Inpatient
Suicide Attempts. Clinical Features and History of Self-Harm,”
Psychological Medicine, 16 (1986): 107–116; M. J. Shkrum and K. A.
Johnston, “Fire and Suicide: A Three Year Study of Self-Immolation
Deaths,” Journal of Forensic Sciences, 37 (1992): 208–221. 142
“sometimes noble and weighty”: Morselli, Suicide: An Essay on
Comparative Moral Statistics, p. 352.
35 “psychological constellation”: L. I. Dublin, Suicide: A Sociological and
Statistical Study (New York: Ronald Press, 1963).
36 read a newspaper report: S. J. Surtees, D. C. Taylor, and R. W. Cooper,
“Suicide and Accidental Death at Beachy Head,” Eastbourne Medical
Gazette, 2 (1976): 22–24; S. J. Surtees, “Suicide and Accidental Death at
Beachy Head,” British Medical Journal, 284 (1982): 321–324.
37 Publicity given to particular ways: D. J. Pounder, “Suicide by Leaping
from Multistorey Car Parks,” Medical Science and Law, 25 (1985): 179–
188; R. H. Haynes, “Suicide in Fiji: A Preliminary Study,” British Journal
of Psychiatry, 145 (1984): 433–438; M. Pinguet, Voluntary Death in Japan,
trans. R. Morris (Cambridge, England: Polity Press, 1993); D. J.
Somasundaram and S. Rajadurai, “War and Suicide in Northern Sri Lanka,”
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 91 (1995): 1–4.
38 publication of Final Exit: P. M. Marzuk, K. Tardiff, C. S. Hirsch, A. C.
Leon, M. Stajic, N. Hartwell, and L. Portera, “Increase in Suicide by
Asphyxiation in New York City After the Publication of Final Exit,” New
England Journal of Medicine, 329 (1993): 1508–1510; P. M. Marzuk, K.
Tardiff, and A. C. Leon, “Increase in Fatal Suicidal Poisonings and
Suffocations in the Year Final Exit Was Published: A National Study,”
American Journal of Psychiatry, 151 (1994): 1813–1814.
39 “In a free society”: J. R. Ashton and S. Donnan, “Suicide by Burning as
an Epidemic Phenomenon: An Analysis of 82 Deaths and Inquests in
England and Wales in 1978–9,” Psychological Medicine, 11 (1981): 735–
739.
40 an almost mythic belief: Y. Takahashi, “Aokigahara-jukai: Suicide and
Amnesia in Mt. Fuji’s Black Forest,” Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behavior, 18 (1988): 164–175.

41 “The suicide epidemic”: E. R. Ellis and G. N. Allen, Traitor Within: Our
Suicide Problem (New York: Doubleday, 1961), pp. 98–99.
42 a language and mythology soon grew up: R. H. Seiden and M. C.
Spence, “A Tale of Two Bridges: Comparative Suicide Incidence on the
Golden Gate and San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridges,” Crisis, 2 (1982):
32–40.
43 the trauma rips: M. Lafave, A. J. LaPorta, J. Hutton, and P. L. Mallory,
“History of High-Velocity Impact Water Trauma at Letterman Army
Medical Center: A 54-Year Experience with the Golden Gate Bridge,”
Military Medicine, 160 (1995): 197–199.
44 “There is a kind of form to it”: D. H. Rosen, “Suicide Survivors: A
Followup of Persons Who Survived Jumping from the Golden Gate and San
Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridges,” Western Journal of Medicine, 122
(1975): 289–294, p. 292.
45 “Why do you make it so easy?”: Quoted in G. H. Colt, The Enigma of
Suicide (New York: Summit, 1991), p. 334.
46 an idea resisted: P. Fimrite, “Anti-Suicide Fence Sample on Display,”
San Francisco Chronicle, 10 June 1998.
47 Five to 10 percent: E. Robins, G. E. Murphy, R. H. Wilkinson, S.
Gassner, and J. Kayes, “Some Clinical Considerations in the Prevention of
Suicide Based on a Study of 134 Successful Suicides,” American Journal of
Public Health, 49 (1959): 888–899; K. A. Achté, A. Stenbäck, and H.
Teräväinen, “On Suicides Committed During Treatment in Psychiatric
Hospitals,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 42 (1969): 272–284; R. Hessö,
“Suicide in Norwegian, Finnish, and Swedish Psychiatric Hospitals,”
Archives of Psychiatry and Neurological Sciences, 224 (1977): 119–127; J.
L. Crammer, “The Special Characteristics of Suicide in Hospital
Inpatients,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 145 (1984): 460–476; U. B.
Sunqvist-Stensman, “Suicides in Close Connection with Psychiatric Care:
An Analysis of 57 Cases in a Swedish County,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 76 (1987): 15–20; M. Wolfersdorf, F. Keller, P.-O. Schmidt-
Michel, C. Weiskittel, R. Vogel, and G. Hole, “Are Hospital Suicides on the
Increase?,” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 23 (1988):
207–216; E. C. Harris and B. Barraclough, “Suicide as an Outcome for
Mental Disorders: A Meta-Analysis,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 170
(1997): 205–228.
48 “Only too often the patients”: E. Kraepelin, Manic-Depressive Insanity

and Paranoia, trans. R. M. Barclay, ed. G. M. Robertson (New York: Arno
Press, 1976; first published 1921), p. 88.
49 twisted cords around the neck: G. R. Jameison and J. H. Wall, “Some
Psychiatric Aspects of Suicide,” Psychiatric Quarterly, 7 (1933): 211–229.
50 “A maid in a green uniform”: S. Plath, The Bell Jar (New York: Harper
& Row, 1971), p. 153.
51 Hanging and jumping are by far: K. A. Achté, A. Stenbäck, and H. Terä-
väinen, “On Suicides Committed During Treatment in Psychiatric
Hospitals,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 42 (1969): 272–284; N. L.
Farberow, S. Ganzler, F. Cutter, and D. Reynolds, “An Eight-Year Survey of
Hospital Suicides,” Life-Threatening Behavior, 1 (1971): 184–202; A. R.
Beisser and J. E. Blanchette, “A Study of Suicides in a Mental Hospital,”
Diseases of the Nervous System, 22 (1961): 365–369; A. K. Shah and T.
Ganesvaran, “Inpatient Suicides in an Australian Mental Hospital,”
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 31 (1997): 291–298; K.
A. Busch, D. C. Clark, J. Fawcett, and H. M. Kravitz, “Clinical Features of
Inpatient Suicide,” Psychiatric Annals, 23 (1993): 256–262; F. Proulx, A.
D. Lesage, and F. Grunberg, “One Hundred Inpatient Suicides,” British
Journal of Psychiatry, 171 (1997): 247–250; V. Sharma, E. Persad, and K.
Kueneman, “A Closer Look at Inpatient Suicide,” Journal of Affective
Disorders, 47 (1998): 123–129.
52 Jan Fawcett and Katie Busch: personal communication with Dr. Jan
Fawcett, Rush–Presbyterian–St. Luke’s Medical Center, Chicago, May
1998.
53 Research indicates: H. G. Morgan, Death Wishes? The Assessment and
Management of Deliberate Self-Harm (New York: Wiley, 1979); P. H.
Salmons, “Suicide in High Buildings,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 145
(1984): 469–472; H. G. Morgan and P. Priest, “Suicide and Other
Unexpected Deaths Among Psychiatric Inpatients,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 158 (1991): 368–374; J. A. Dennehey, L. Appleby, C. S.
Thomas, et al., “Case Control Study of Suicides by Discharged Psychiatric
Patients,” British Medical Journal, 312 (1996): 1580; K. A. Busch, D. C.
Clark, J. Fawcett, and H. M. Kravitz, “Clinical Features of Inpatient
Suicide,” Psychiatric Annals, 23 (1993): 256–262; H. G. Morgan and R.
Stanton, “Suicide Among Psychiatric Inpatients in a Changing Clinical
Scene,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 171 (1997): 561–563; V. Sharma, E.
Persad, and K. Kueneman, “A Closer Look at Inpatient Suicide,” Journal of

Affective Disorders, 47 (1998) 123–129.
ESSAY • THE LION ENCLOSURE
1 “The Woman at the Washington Zoo”: Randall Jarrell (1914–1965) wrote
this poem while living in Washington, D.C., in the 1950s. He and his wife
frequently visited the zoo, and he drove past it almost every day on his way
through Rock Creek Park to his job at the Library of Congress. Jarrell,
when asked about the central character in “The Woman at the Washington
Zoo,” described her as having a despair “beyond expression … inside the
mechanical official cage of her life, her body, she lives invisibly; no one
feeds this animal, reads out its name, pokes a stick through the bars at it—
the cage is empty … she has become her own cage” (“The Woman at the
Washington Zoo,” pp. 319–327, reprinted in Randall Jarrell, Kipling, Auden
& Co.: Essays and Reviews: 1935–1964 [New York: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, 1980], pp. 324–325). Jarrell received the National Book Award for
his collection of poems The Woman at the Washington Zoo. In 1965, after
being hospitalized for manic-depressive illness and an attempted suicide,
Jarrell was killed by an oncoming car at night. The circumstances of his
death provoked considerable debate about whether it had been an accident
or suicide. (J. Meyers, “The Death of Randall Jarrell,” The Virginia
Quarterly Review, Summer 1982, pp. 450–467; Randall Jarrell’s Letters,
ed. Mary Jarrell [Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1985]; W. H. Pritchard,
Randall Jarrell: A Literary Life [New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux,
1990]; K. R. Jamison, Touched with Fire: Manic-Depressive Illness and the
Artistic Temperament [New York: Free Press, 1993]).
2 instinct would dictate: George B. Schaller, The Serengeti Lion: A Study of
Predator-Prey Relations (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972).
3 The Washington Post: The Washington Post published five news stories
about the death of Margaret Davis King, March 6–10, 1995, and the
Arkansas Democrat-Gazette published articles on March 7, 8, and 10, 1995.
4 “Suddenly,” wrote journalist: Phil McCombs, “In the Lair of the Urban
Lion,” Washington Post, March 7, 1995.
5 We have released: W. R. Breakey, P. J. Fischer, M. Kramer, et al., “Health
and Mental Health Problems of Homeless Men and Women in Baltimore,”
Journal of the American Medical Association, 10 (1989): 1352–1357; E.
Susser, R. Moore, and B. Link, “Risk Factors for Homelessness,” American

Journal of Epidemiology 15 (1993): 546–556; T. K. J. Craig and P. W.
Timms, “Homelessness and Schizophrenia,” in S. R. Hirsch and D. R.
Weinberger, eds., Schizophrenia (Oxford: Blackwell Science, 1995), pp.
664–684.
6 They die younger: C. H. Alstrom, R. Lindelius, and I. Salum, “Mortality
Among Homeless Men,” British Journal of Addiction, 70 (1975): 245–252;
Centers for Disease Control, “Deaths Among the Homeless,” Mortality and
Morbidity Weekly Report, 36 (1987): 297–299; Centers for Disease Control,
“Deaths Among Homeless Persons—San Francisco, 1985–1990,” Mortality
and Morbidity Weekly Report, 40 (1991): 877–880; J. R. Hibbs, L. Benner,
L. Klugman, R. Spencer, I. Macchia, A. K. Mellinger, and D. Fife,
“Mortality in a Cohort of Homeless Adults in Philadelphia,” New England
Journal of Medicine 331 (1994): 304–309. 158 In a 1986 editorial: R. J.
Wyatt and E. G. De Renzo, “Scienceless to Homeless,” Science, 234
(1986): 1309.
6 • A PLUNGE INTO DEEP WATERS
1 “It was, he said”: Edgar Allan Poe, The Fall of the House of Usher.
Problems with alcohol and a lifetime of virulent moods eventually caught
up with Edgar Allan Poe (1809–1849), who attempted suicide the year
before he died.
2 “But it is always a question”: Virginia Woolf, The Diary of Virginia
Woolf, vol 3. Virginia Woolf (1882–1941), in whose family there was a
great deal of depressive illness, committed suicide after years of struggling
with manic-depression.
3 Human conduct: J. Ordronaux, “On Suicide,” American Journal of
Insanity, 20 (1864): 380–401, p. 380.”
4 “Observations show that”: Ibid., p. 381.
5 “With reference to suicide”: F. Winslow, The Anatomy of Suicide (Boston:
Longwood Press, 1978; first published 1840), p. 152.
6 “Captains C. L. and J. L.”: B. Rush, Medical Inquiries and Observations
upon the Diseases of the Mind (New York: Kimber and Richardson, 1812).
7 “There is nothing more firmly established”: C. W. Pilgrim, “Insanity and
Suicide,” American Journal of Insanity, 63 (1907): 349–360, p. 359.
8 “The evil results”: J. M. S. Wood and A. R. Urquhart, “A Family Tree

Illustrative of Insanity and Suicide,” Journal of Mental Science, 47 (1901):
764–767, p. 767.
9 “A man named Edgar Jay Briggs”: Medical Record, 60 (1901): 660–661.
10 More recently, in Iraq: F. Dabbagh, “Family Suicide,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 130 (1977): 159–161.
11 Many other “suicide families”: For example, L. B. Shapiro, “Suicide:
Psychology and Familial Tendency—Report of a Family of Suicides with
History and Discussion,” Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 81
(1935): 547–553; Khin-Maung-Zaw, “A Suicidal Family,” British Journal
of Psychiatry, 139 (1981): 68–69.
12 a strong genetic basis: I. I. Gottesman and J. Shields, Schizophrenia and
Genetics: A Twin Vantage Point (New York: Academic Press, 1972); S. S.
Kety, D. Rosenthal, P. H. Wender, F. Schulsinger, and B. Jacobsen, “Mental
Illness in the Biological and Adoptive Families of Individuals Who Have
Become Schizophrenic,” Behaviour Genetics, 6 (1976): 219–225; I. I.
Gottesman and J. Shields, Schizophrenia: The Epigenetic Puzzle
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982); K. S. Kendler and A. M.
Gruenberg, “An Independent Antigen of the Danish Adoption Study of
Schizophrenia: VI. The Relationship Between Psychiatric Disorders as
Defined by DSM-III in the Relatives and Adoptees,” Archives of General
Psychiatry, 41 (1984): 555–564; P. McGuffin, A. E. Farmer, I. I.
Gottesman, R. M. Murray, and A. Reveley, “Twin Concordance for
Operationally Defined Schizophrenia: Confirmation of Familiality and
Heritability,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 41 (1984): 541–545; I. I.
Gottesman and A. Bertlesen, “Confirming Unexpressed Genotypes for
Schizophrenia—Risks in the Offspring of Fischer’s Danish Identical and
Fraternal Discordant Twins,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 46 (1989):
867–872; M. T. Tsuang and S. V. Faraone, The Genetics of Mood Disorders
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins, 1990); P. Tienari, “Gene-Environment
Interaction in Adoptive Families,” in H. Hafner and W. Gattaz, eds., Search
for the Causes of Schizophrenia (Berlin: Springer, 1990), pp. 126–143; W.
H. Berrettini, T. N. Ferraro, L. R. Goldin, D. E. Weeks, S. Detera-Wadleigh,
J. I. Nurnberger, and E. S. Gershon, “Chromosome 18 DNA Markers and
Manic-Depressive 
Illness: 
Evidence 
for 
a 
Susceptibility 
Gene,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 91 (1994): 5918–
5921; P. Asherson, R. Mant, and P. McGuffin, “Genetics and
Schizophrenia,” in S. R. Hirsch and D. R. Weinberger, eds., Schizophrenia
(Oxford: Blackwell Science, 1995), pp. 253–274; O. C. Stine, J. Xu, R.

Koskela, F. J. McMahon, M. Gschwend, C. Friddle, C. D. Clark, M. G.
McInnis, S. G. Simpson, T. S. Breschel, E. Vishio, K. Riskin, H. Feilotter,
E. Chen, S. Shen, S. Folstein, D. A. Meyers, D. Botstein, T. G. Marr, and J.
R. DePaulo, “Evidence for Linkage of Bipolar Disorder to Chromosome 18
with a Parent-of-Origin Effect,” American Journal of Human Genetics, 57
(1995): 1384–1395; N. B. Freimer, V. I. Reus, M. A. Escamilla, L. A.
McInnes, M. Spesny, P. Leon, S, K. Service, L. Smith, S. Silva, E. Rojas, A.
Gallegos, L. Meza, E. Fournier, S. Baharloo, K. Blankenship, D. J. Tyler, S.
Batki, S. Vinogradov, J. Weissenbach, S. H. Barondes, and L. A. Lodewijk,
“Genetic Mapping Using Haplotype, Association and Linkage Methods
Suggests a Locus for Severe Bipolar Disorder (BPI) at 18q22-q23,” Nature
Genetics, 12 (1996): 436–441; E. S. Gershon, J. A. Badner, S. D. Detera-
Wadleigh, T. N. Ferraro, and W. H. Berrettini, “Maternal Inheritance and
Chromosome 18 Allele Sharing in Unilineal Bipolar Illness Pedigrees,”
Neuropsychiatric Genetics, 67 (1996): 202–207; D. F. MacKinnon, K. R.
Jamison, and J. R. DePaulo, “Genetics of Manic Depressive Illness,”
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 20 (1997): 355–373; S. H. Barondes,
Mood Genes: Hunting for Origins of Mania and Depression (New York: W.
H. Freeman, 1998).
13 more than thirty family studies: Among them are N. Farberow and M.
Simon, “Suicide in Los Angeles and Vienna: An Intercultural Study of Two
Cities,” Public Health Report, 84 (1969): 389–403; F. Stallone, D. L.
Dunner, J. Ahearn, and R. R. Fieve, “Statistical Predictions of Suicide in
Depressives,” Comprehensive Psychiatry, 21 (1980): 381–387; C. Tishler,
P. McKenry, and K. Morgan, “Adolescent Suicide Attempts: Some
Significant Factors,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 11 (1981):
86–92; B. D. Garfinkel, A. Froese, and J. Hood, “Suicide Attempts in
Children and Adolescents,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 139 (1982):
1257–1261; G. E. Murphy and R. D. Wetzel, “Family History of Suicidal
Behavior Among Suicide Attempters,” Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease, 170 (1982): 86–90; K. M. Myers, P. Burke, and E. McCauley,
“Suicidal Behavior Among Suicide Attempters,” Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 170 (1982): 86–90; C. R. Pfeffer, G. Solomon, R. Plutchik,
M. S. Mizruchi, and A. Weiner, “Suicidal Behavior in Latency-Age
Psychiatric Inpatients: A Replication and Cross Validation,” Journal of the
American Academy of Child Psychiatry, 21 (1982): 564–569; A. Roy,
“Family History of Suicide,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 40 (1983):
971–974; M. T. Tsuang, “Risk of Suicide in Relatives of Schizophrenics,

Manics, Depressives, and Controls,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 44
(1983): 396–400; J. A. Egeland and J. N. Sussex, “Suicide and Family
Loading for Affective Disorders,” Journal of the American Medical
Association, 254 (1985): 915–918; A. Roy, “Family History of Suicide in
Manic-Depressive Patients,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 8 (1985): 187–
189; M. Shafii, S. Carrigan, R. Whittinghill, and A. Derrick, “Psychological
Autopsy of Completed Suicides in Children and Adolescents,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 142 (1985): 1061–1064; M. Kerfoot, “Deliberate
Self-Poisoning in Childhood and Early Adolescence,” Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 29 (1988): 335–343; D. Shaffer, “The
Epidemiology of Teen Suicide: An Examination of Risk Factors,” Journal
of Clinical Psychiatry, 49 (1988): 36–41; B. Mitterauer, “A Contribution to
the Discussion of the Role of the Genetic Factor in Suicide, Based on Five
Studies in an Epidemiologically Defined Area (Province of Salzburg,
Austria),” Comprehensive Psychiatry, 31 (1990): 557–565; S. B. Sorenson
and C. M. Rutter, “Transgenerational Patterns of Suicide Attempt,” Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 59 (1991): 861–866; C. R. Pfeffer,
L. Normandin, and T. Kakuma, “Suicidal Children Grow Up: Suicidal
Behavior and Psychiatric Disorders Among Relatives,” Journal of
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 33 (1994): 1087–
1097; K. Malone, G. Haas, J. Sweeney, and J. Mann, “Major Depression
and the Risk of Attempted Suicide,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 34
(1995): 173–185; D. A. Brent, J. Bridge, B. A. Johnson, and J. Connolly,
“Suicidal Behavior Runs in Families: A Controlled Family Study of
Adolescent Suicide Victims,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 53 (1996):
1145–1152; B. A. Johnson, D. A. Brent, J. Bridge, and J. Connolly, “The
Familial Aggregation of Adolescent Suicide Attempts,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 97 (1998): 18–24; D. J. Statham, A. C. Heath, P. A. F.
Madden, K. K. Bucholz, L. Bierut, S. H. Dinwiddie, W. S. Slutske, M. P.
Dunne, and N. G. Martin, “Suicidal Behaviour: An Epidemiological and
Genetic Study,” Psychological Medicine, 28 (1998): 839–855.

14 suicide in a violent manner: P. Linkowski, V. de Maertelaer, and J.
Mendlewicz, “Suicidal Behaviour in Major Depressive Illness,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 72 (1985): 233–238; G. N. Papadimitriou, P.
Linkowski, C. Delarbre, and J. Mendlewicz, “Suicide on the Paternal and
Maternal Sides of Depressed Patients with a Lifetime History of Attempted
Suicide,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 83 (1991): 417–419; A. Roy,
“Features Associated with Suicide Attempts in Depression: A Partial
Replication,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 27 (1993): 35–38.
15 the Old Order Amish: J. A. Egeland and J. N. Sussex, “Suicide and
Family Loading for Affective Disorders,” Journal of the American Medical
Association, 254 (1985): 915–918.
16 “racing one’s horse and carriage”: J. A. Egeland, A. M. Hostetter, and S.
K. Eshleman, “Amish Study: III. The Impact of Cultural Factors on
Diagnosis of Bipolar Illness,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 140 (1983):
67–71, p. 68.
17 replicated in an Austrian study: B. Mitterauer, M. Leibetseder, W. F.
Pritz, and G. Sorgo, “Comparisons of Psychopathological Phenomena of
422 Manic-Depressive Patients with Suicide-Positive and Suicide-Negative
Family History,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 77 (1988): 438–442; B.
Mitterauer, “A Contribution to the Discussion of the Role of the Genetic
Factor in Suicide, Based on Five Studies in an Epidemiologically Defined
Area (Province of Salzburg, Austria),” Comprehensive Psychiatry, 31
(1990): 557–565; B. A. Johnson, D. A. Brent, J. Bridge, and J. Connolly,
“The Familial Aggregation of Adolescent Suicide Attempts,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 97 (1998): 18–24.
18 nearly four hundred pairs: W. Haberlandt, “Aportación a la Genética del
Suicidio,” Filio Clínica Internacional, 17 (1967): 319–322; N. Juel-Nielsen
and T. Videbech, “A Twin Study of Suicide,” Acta Geneticae Medicae et
Gemellologiae, 19 (1970): 307–310; A. Roy, G. Rylander, and M.
Sarchiapone, “Genetics of Suicide: Family Studies and Molecular
Genetics,” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 836 (1997): 135–
157; A. Roy, D. Nielsen, G. Rylander, M. Sarchiapone, and N. Segal,
“Genetics of Suicide in Depression,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry (Suppl.
2) (1999): 12–17.
19 In a different study: A Roy, N. L. Segal, and M. Sarchiapone,
“Attempted Suicide Among Living Co-Twins of Twin Suicide Victims,”
American Journal of Psychiatry, 152 (1995): 1075–1076.

20 concordance rate observed for manic-depression: P. McGuffin and R.
Katz, “The Genetics of Depression and Manic-Depressive Disorder,”
British Journal of Psychiatry, 155 (1989): 294–304; M. T. Tsuang and S. V.
Faraone, The Genetics of Mood Disorders (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins,
1990); L. Rifkin and H. Gurling, “Genetic Aspects of Affective Disorders,”
in R. Horton and C. Katona, eds., Biological Aspects of Affective Disorders
(London: Academic Press, 1991), pp. 305–334; D. F. MacKinnon, K. R.
Jamison, and J. R. DePaulo, “Genetics of Manic Depressive Illness,”
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 20 (1997): 355–373; A. G. Cardno, E. J.
Marshall, B. Coid, A. M. Macdonald, T. R. Ribchester, N. J. Davies, P.
Venturi, L. A. Jones, S. W. Lewis, P. C. Sham, I. I. Gottesman, A. E.
Farmer, P. McGuffin, A. M. Revely, and R. M. Murray, “Heritability
Estimates for Psychotic Disorders,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 56
(1999): 162–168. (Note: Concordance rates for manic-depressive illness in
dizygotic, or fraternal, twins range from 13 to 30 percent.)
21 concordance rate for … schizophrenia: E. Kringlen, “Twins—Still Our
Best Method,” Schizophrenia Bulletin, 2 (1976): 429–433; I. I. Gottesman
and J. Shields, Schizophrenia: The Epigenetic Puzzle (Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press, 1982); A. E. Farmer, P. McGuffin, and I. I.
Gottesman, “Twin Concordance for DSM-III Schizophrenia: Scrutinizing
the Validity of the Definition,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 44 (1987):
634–641; S. Onstad, I. Skre, S. Torgersen, and E. Kringlen, “Twin
Concordance 
for 
DSM-III-R 
Schizophrenia,” 
Acta 
Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 83 (1991): 395–402; P. Asherson, R. Mant, and P. McGuffin,
“Genetics and Schizophrenia,” in S. R. Hirsch and D. R. Weinberger, eds.,
Schizophrenia (Oxford: Blackwell Science, 1995), pp. 253–274. (Note:
Concordance rates for schizophrenia in dizygotic, or fraternal, twins are
generally in the range of 15 to 20 percent.)
22 The first study: R. Schulsinger, S. Kety, D. Rosenthal, and P. Wender, “A
Family Study of Suicide,” in M. Schou and E. Stromgren, eds., Origins,
Prevention and Treatment of Affective Disorders (New York: Academic
Press, 1979), pp. 277–287.
23 more than half of those: M. M. Weissman, J. K. Myers, and W. D.
Thompson, “Depression and Treatment in a U.S. Urban Community: 1975–
1976,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 38 (1981): 417–421; S. Shapiro, E.
A. Skinner, L. G. Kessler, M. Von Korff, P. S. German, G. L. Tischler, P. J.
Leaf, L. Benham, L. Cotler, and D. A. Regier, “Utilization of Health and
Mental Health Services: Three Epidemiologic Catchment Area Sites,”

Archives of General Psychiatry, 41 (1984): 971–978; L. N. Robins and D.
A. Regier, eds., Psychiatric Disorders in America: The Epidemiologic
Catchment Area Study (New York: Free Press, 1991).
24 In a second study of Danish adoptees: P. Wender, D. Kety, D. Rosenthal,
F. Schulsinger, J. Ortmann, and I. Lunde, “Psychiatric Disorders in the
Biological and Adoptive Families of Adopted Individuals with Affective
Disorder,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 43 (1986): 923–929.
25 Ivor Jones and Brian Barraclough: I. H. Jones and B. M. Barraclough,
“Auto-Mutilation in Animals and Its Relevance to Self-Injury in Man,”
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 58 (1978): 40–47, pp. 45–46.
26 Severe self-inflicted injuries: J. D. Christian and H. L. Ratcliffe, “Shock
Disease in Captive Wild Animals,” American Journal of Pathology, 28
(1952): 725–737; H. A. Cross and H. F. Harlow, “Prolonged and
Progressive Effects of Partial Isolation on the Behaviour of Macaque
Monkeys,” Journal of Experimental Research on Personality, 1 (1965): 39–
49; M. Meyer-Holzapfel, “Abnormal Behaviour in Zoo Animals,” in F. W.
Fox, ed., Abnormal Behaviour in Animals (Philadelphia: Saunders, 1968),
pp. 476–503; C. A. Levison, “Development of Head Banging in a Young
Rhesus Monkey,” American Journal of Mental Deficiency, 75 (1970): 323–
328; K. A. McColl, “Necropsy Findings in Captive Platypus
(Ornithorhynchus anatinus) in Victoria, Australia,” in M. Fowler, ed.,
Wildlife Diseases of the Pacific Basin and Other Countries (Proceedings of
the Fourth International Conference of the Wildlife Disease Association,
Sydney, Australia, August 25–29, 1981); M. S. Landi, J. W. Kreider, C. M.
Lang, and L. P. Bullock, “Effects of Shipping on the Immune Function in
Mice,” American Journal of Veterinary Research, 43 (1982): 1654–1657.
27 Many ranch mink: G. de Jonge, K. Carlstead, and P. R. Wiepkema, The
Welfare of Ranch Mink, Publication 010, Centre for Poultry Research and
Extension, Beekbergen, Netherlands, 1986.
28 “the severe class”: I. H. Jones, “Self-Injury: Toward a Biological Basis,”
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 26 (1982): 137–150, p. 138.
29 The agitation and frustration appear: E. M. Boyd, M. Dolman, L. M.
Knight, and E. P. Sheppard, “The Chronic Oral Toxicity of Caffeine,”
Canadian Journal of Psychology Pharmacology, 43 (1965): 995–1007; H.
A. Cross and H. F. Harlow, “Prolonged and Progressive Effects of Partial
Isolation on the Behavior of Macaque Monkeys,” Journal of Experimental
Research on Personality, 1 (1965): 39–49; J. M. Peters, “Caffeine Induced

Hemorrhagic 
Automutilation,” 
Archives 
of 
International
Pharmacodynamics, 169 (1967): 139–146; A. S. Chamove and H. F.
Harlow, “Exaggeration of Self-Aggression Following Alcohol Ingestion in
Rhesus Monkeys,” Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 75 (1970): 207–209;
G. Allyn, A. Demye, and I. Begue, “Self-Fighting Syndrome in Macaques:
A Representative Case Study,” Primate Medicine, 17 (1976): 1–22.
30 Prisoners, for example: F. Yaroshevsky, “Self-Mutilation in Soviet
Prisons,” Canadian Psychiatric Association Journal, 20 (1975): 443–446.
31 Rats, when too populous: J. B. Calhoun, The Ecology and Sociology of
the Norway Rat, Public Health Service Publication no. 1008 (Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1963).
32 Cannibalism occasionally erupts: M. P. Simon, “The Influence of
Conspecifics on Egg and Larval Mortality in Amphibians,” in G. Hausfater
and S. B. Hrdy, eds., Infanticide: Comparative and Evolutionary
Perspectives (New York: Aldine, 1984), pp. 65–86; W. L. Rootes and R. H.
Chabreck, “Cannibalism in the American Alligator,” Herpetogica, 49
(1993): 99–107.
33 Snowshoe hares: R. G. Green, C. L. Larson, and J. F. Bell, “Shock
Disease as the Cause of the Periodic Decimation of the Snowshoe Hare,”
American Journal of Hygiene, 30 (1939): 83–102.
34 Prolonged psychopathology: S. J. Suomi, H. F. Harlow, and M. T.
McKinney, “Monkey Psychiatrists,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 128
(1972): 927–932.
35 Lemmings, the poster animals: D. Chitty, Do Lemmings Commit
Suicide? Beautiful Hypotheses and Ugly Facts (New York: Oxford, 1996).
36 George Schaller observed: G. B. Schaller, The Serengeti Lion: A Study of
Predator-Prey Relations (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972).
37 “We are strongly predisposed”: E. O. Wilson, On Human Nature
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1978), pp. 106, 119.
38 The recently emerging field: D. de Catanzaro, Suicide and Self-
Damaging Behavior: A Sociobiological Perspective (New York: Academic
Press, 1981); R. Gardner, “Mechanisms in Manic-Depressive Disorder: An
Evolutionary Model,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 39 (1982): 1436–
1441; D. H. Rubinstein, “A Stress-Diathesis Theory of Suicide,” Suicide
and Life-Threatening Behavior, 16 (1986): 100–115; R. M. Nesse,
“Evolutionary Explanations of Emotions,” Human Nature, 1 (1990): 261–
289; P. Gilbert, Depression: The Evolution of Powerlessness (New York:

Guilford, 1992); M. T. McGuire, I. Marks, R. M. Nesse, and A. Troisi,
“Evolutionary Biology: A Basic Science for Psychiatry?” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 86 (1992): 89–96; K. R. Jamison, Touched with Fire: Manic-
Depressive Illness and the Artistic Temperament (New York: Free Press,
1993); D. R. Wilson, “Evolutionary Epidemiology: Darwinian Theory in
the Service of Medicine and Psychiatry,” Acta Biotheoretica, 41 (1993):
205–218; J. Price, L. Sloman, R. Gardner, P. Gilbert, and P. Rohde, “The
Social Competition Hypothesis of Depression,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 164 (1994): 309–315; D. S. Wilson, “Adaptive Genetic
Variation 
and 
Human 
Evolutionary 
Psychology,” 
Ethology 
and
Sociobiology, 15 (1994): 219–235; D. R. Wilson, “The Darwinian Roots of
Human Neurosis,” Acta Biotheoretica, 42 (1994): 49–62; R. M. Brown, E.
Dahlen, C. Mills, J. Rick, and A. Biblarz, “Evaluation of an Evolutionary
Model of Self-Preservation and Self-Destruction,” Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior, 29 (1999): 58–71.
39 the same cognitive and social: M. Hammer and J. Zubin, “Evolution,
Culture, and Psychopathology,” Journal of General Psychology, 78 (1968):
151–164; D. F. Horrobin, A. Ally, R. A. Karmali, M. Karmazyn, M. S.
Manka, and R. O. Morgan, “Prostaglandins and Schizophrenia: Further
Discussion of the Evidence,” Psychological Bulletin, 8 (1978): 43–48; L.
Sloman, M. Konstantareas, and D. W. Dunham, “The Adaptive Role of
Maladaptive Neurosis,” Biological Psychiatry, 14 (1979): 961–972; J. S.
Price and L. Sloman, “The Evolutionary Model of Psychiatric Disorder,”
Archives of General Psychiatry, 41 (1984): 211; S. Vinogradov, I.
Gottesman, H. Molses, and S. Nicol, “Negative Association Between
Schizophrenia and Rheumatoid Arthritis,” Schizophrenia Bulletin, 17
(1991): 669–678; D. B. Horrobin, “Schizophrenia: The Illness That Made
Us Human,” Medical Hypotheses, 50 (1998): 269–288; R. J. Wyatt,
“Schizophrenia: Closing the Gap Between Genetics, Epidemiology, and
Prevention,” in E. Susser, A. Brown, and J. Gorman, eds., Epigenetic
Causes of Schizophrenia (Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric
Association Press, 1999), pp. 241–261.
40 Timothy Crow: T. J. Crow, “Temporal Lobe Asymmetries as the Key to
the Etiology of Schizophrenia,” Schizophrenia Bulletin, 16 (1990): 433–
443; T. J. Crow, “Constraints on Concepts of Pathogenesis: Language and
the Speciation Process as the Key to the Etiology of Schizophrenia,”
Archives of General Psychiatry, 52 (1995): 1011–1014; T. J. Crow, “A
Darwinian Approach to the Origins of Psychosis,” British Journal of

Psychiatry, 167 (1995): 12–25; T. J. Crow, “Is Schizophrenia the Price That
Homo sapiens Pays for Language?” Schizophrenia Research, 28 (1997):
127–141.
41 Depression, characterized as it is: J. Price, L. Sloman, R. J. Gardner, P.
Gilbert, and P. Rohde, “The Social Competition Hypothesis of Depression,”
British Journal of Psychiatry, 164 (1994): 309–315; I. H. Jones, D. M.
Stoddart, and J. Mallick, “Towards a Sociobiological Model of Depression:
A Marsupial Model,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 166 (1995): 475–479;
J. H. G. Williams, “Using Behavioural Ecology to Understand Depression,”
British Journal of Psychiatry, 173 (1998): 453–454.
42 Less dominant animals: P. Gilbert, Depression: The Evolution of
Powerlessness (New York: Guilford Press, 1992); J. S. Price, L. Sloman, R.
Gardner, P. Gilbert, and P. Rohde, “The Social Competition Hypothesis of
Depression,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 164 (1994): 309.
43 “[Icarus] glances up”: A. Sexton, “To a Friend Whose Work Has Come
to Triumph,” in The Complete Poems of Anne Sexton (Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1981), p. 53.
44 uncommonly creative: R. A. Woodruff, L. N. Robins, G. Winokur, and
T. Reich, “Manic-Depressive Illness and Social Achievement,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 47 (1971): 237–249; C. Bagley, “Occupational
Class and Symptoms of Depression,” Social Sciences and Medicine, 7
(1973): 327–340; F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison, Manic-Depressive
Illness (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990), pp. 169–173; W.
Coryell, J. Endicott, M. Keller, N. Andreasen, W. Groove, R. M. A.
Hirschfeld, and W. Scheftner, “Bipolar Affective Disorder and High
Achievement: A Familial Association,” American Journal of Psychiatry,
146 (1989): 983–988. Anthropologist and physician Melvin Konner has
also addressed this issue in Why the Reckless Survive … and Other Secrets
of Nature (New York: Viking, 1990).
45 At least twenty studies: A partial listing of the studies or related
discussions include C. Martindale, “Father’s Absence, Psychopathology,
and Poetic Eminence,” Psychological Reports, 31 (1972): 843–847; A.
Storr, The Dynamics of Creation (London: Secker & Warburg, 1972); W. H.
Trethowan, “Music and Mental Disorder,” in M. Critchley and R. E.
Henson, eds., Music and the Brain (London: Heinemann, 1977), pp. 398–
442; R. Richards, “Relationships Between Creativity and Psychopathology:
An Evaluation and Interpretation of the Evidence,” Genetic Psychology

Monographs, 103 (1981): 261–324; N. C. Andreasen, “Creativity and
Mental Illness: Prevalence Rates in Writers and Their First-Degree
Relatives,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 144 (1987): 1288–1292; R. L.
Richards, D. K. Kinney, I. Lunde, and M. Benet, “Creativity in Manic-
Depressives, Cyclothymes, and Their Normal First-Degree Relatives: A
Preliminary Report,” Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 97 (1988): 281–
288; K. R. Jamison, “Mood Disorders and Patterns of Creativity in British
Writers and Artists,” Psychiatry, 52 (1989): 125–134; K. R. Jamison,
Touched with Fire: Manic-Depressive Illness and the Artistic Temperament
(New York: Free Press, 1993); F. Post, “Creativity and Psychopathology: A
Study of 291 World-Famous Men,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 165
(1994): 22–34; J. J. Schildkraut, A. J. Hirshfeld, and J. M. Murphy, “Mind
and Mood in Modern Art: II. Depressive Disorders, Spirituality, and Early
Deaths in the Abstract Expressionist Artists of the New York School,”
American Journal of Psychiatry, 151 (1994): 482–488; A. M. Ludwig, The
Price of Greatness: Resolving the Creativity and Madness Controversy
(New York: Guilford Press, 1995); F. Post, “Verbal Creativity, Depression,
and Alcoholism: An Investigation of One Hundred American and British
Writers,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 168 (1996): 545–555.
46 “But mark how beautiful an order”: Percy Bysshe Shelley, A Defence of
Poetry, in R. Ingpen and W. E. Peck, eds., The Complete Works of Percy
Bysshe Shelley, vol. 7 (New York: Gordian Press, 1965), p. 126.
47 “Is the shipwrack then a harvest”: Gerard Manley Hopkins, “The Wreck
of the Deutschland,” ll. 248–249 in N. H. MacKenzie, ed., The Poetical
Work of Gerard Manley Hopkins (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990), p. 127.
48 “It isn’t possible”: Vincent van Gogh to Theo van Gogh, 1888 (undated),
in The Complete Letters of Vincent van Gogh, vol. 2 (Boston: New York
Graphic Society, 1958), p. 542.
49 The source of the data on natural scientists, business leaders, theater
people, (international) writers, and international poets is A. Ludwig, The
Price of Greatness (New York: Guilford Press, 1995); for composers, W. H.
Trethowan, “Music and Mental Disorder,” in M. Critchley and R. E.
Henson, eds., Music and the Brain (London: Heinemann, 1977), pp. 398–
442; for American poets, unpublished study of Pulitzer Prize winners by K.
R. Jamison, 1999; for British poets, K. R. Jamison, Touched with Fire (New
York: Free Press, 1993); for Japanese writers, Mamoru Iga, The Thorn in
the Chrysanthemum: Suicide and Economic Success in Modern Japan
(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1986); for

American artists (Abstract Expressionists): J. J. Schildkraut, A. J. Hirshfeld,
and J. M. Murphy, “Mind and Mood in Modern Art: II. Depressive
Disorders, Spirituality, and Early Deaths in the Abstract Expressionist
Artists of the New York School,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 151
(1994): 482–488.
50 Many of these artists, writers, and scientists: A partial list of writers who
committed suicide includes Francis Ellingwood Abbott, Ryuunosuke
Akutagawa, Takeo Arishima, James Robert Baker, Thomas Lovell Beddoes,
Walter Benjamin, John Berryman, Charles Blount, Barcroft Boake, Tadeusz
Borowski, Richard Brautigan, William Clark Brinkley, Charles Buckmaster,
Eustace Budgell, Don Carpenter, Paul Celan, Thomas Chatterton, Charles
Caleb Colton, Hart Crane, Thomas Creech, John Davidson, Osamu Dazai,
Tove Ditlevsen, Michael Dorris, Stephen Duck, Sergey Esenin, Aleksander
Fadeyev, John Gould Fletcher, Romain Gary, Adam Lindsay Gordon,
Richard Harris, Thomas Heggen, James Leo Herlihy, Ernest Hemingway,
Ashihei Hino, Robin Hyde, William Inge, Shungetsu Ikuta, B. S. Johnson,
Michioi Katō, Yasunari Kawabata, Bisan Kawakami, Tōkoku Kitamura,
Heinrich von Kleist, Arthur Koestler, Jerzy Kosinski, Letitia E. Landon,
Primo Levi, Vachel Lindsay, Ross Lockridge Jr., Anthony Lukas, Philipp
Mainländer, F. O. Matthiessen, Vladimir Mayakovsky, Charlotte Mew,
Hugh Miller, Walter M. Miller Jr., Yukio Mishima, Yves Navarre, Gérard de
Nerval, Arthur Nortje, John O’Brien, Cesare Pavese, Sylvia Plath, QuYuan,
Ferdinand Raimund, Jacques Rigaut, Anne Sexton, Sir John Suckling, Eikō
Tanaka, Robert Tannahill, Sara Teasdale, Frank Tilsley, John Kennedy
Toole, George Trakl, Marina Tsvetayeva, Frances Vernon, Anna Wickham,
Virginia Woolf, Constance Fenimore Woolson, Paolo Yashvili, and Stefan
Zweig. There is suggestive evidence of suicide in the deaths of Robert
Burton, Eugene Izzi, Randall Jarrell, and Jack London. A partial list of
artists who committed suicide includes Ralph Barton, James Carroll
Beckwith, Francesco Borromini, Patrick Henry Bruce, Dora Carrington,
John Currie, Edward Dayes, Rosso Fiorentino (probably), Richard Gerstl,
Mark Gertler, Vincent van Gogh, Arshile Gorky, Benjamin Haydon,
William Morris Hunt, Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, Wilhelm Lehmbruck,
François Le Moyne, Alfred Maurer, Jules Pascin, Eric Pauelson (Poulsen),
Mark Rothko, Jean-Louis Sauce, Jochem Seidel, Nicolas de Staël, Pietro
Testa, Henry Tilson, William Walton, Brett Whitely, Johannes Wiedewelt,
Ezra Winter, Emanuel de Witte, and Jacob de Wolf. (The suicides of several
early painters are discussed by Rudolf and Margot Wittkower in their book

Born Under Saturn [New York: W. W. Norton, 1963].) Many others, who
did not die from suicide, attempted it: among them are writers Anna
Akhmatova, A. Alvarez, James Baldwin, Konstanin Batyushkov, Charles
Baudelaire, Hayden Carruth, Joseph Conrad, William Cowper, Isak
Dinesen, Afansy Fet, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Gustav Fröding, Lewis Grassic
Gibbon, Maxim Gorky, Graham Greene, Nikolai Gumilyov, Ivor Gurney,
Herman Hesse, J. M. R. Lenz, Osip Mandelstam, Eugene O’Neill, Dorothy
Parker, Edgar Allan Poe, Laura Riding, Percy Bysshe Shelley, Francis
Thompson, Evelyn Waugh, and Mary Wollstonecraft, and artists Paul
Gauguin, George Innes, Frida Kahlo, and Dante Gabriel Rossetti. A number
of eminent scientists, mathematicians, and inventors have also committed
suicide, including Ludwig Boltzmann, founder of statistical mechanics;
Paul Ehrenfest, theoretical physicist; Alan Turing, mathematician and
pioneer in computer theory; Emil Fischer, Nobel laureate in chemistry who
did fundamental research on sugars and purines, and synthesized caffeine
and barbiturates; Paul Kammerer, experimental biologist and author of The
Transformation of Species; Robert Fitzroy, captain of HMS Beagle,
hydrographer, and meteorologist; Wallace Carothers, inventor of nylon and
coinventor of synthetic rubber; Meriwether Lewis, explorer; and Yataka
Taniyama, mathematician. Mathematicians G. H. Hardy and Srinivasa
Aaiyanger Remanujan attempted suicide.
51 “The hand that whirls the water”: D. Thomas, “The Force That Through
the Green Fuse Drives the Flower,” ll. 11–13, in The Collected Poems of
Dylan Thomas (New York: New Directions, 1957).
7 • DEATH-BLOOD
1 “I have a violence in me”: Sylvia Plath, journal entry, June 11, 1958.
American poet Sylvia Plath (1932–1963) wrote extensively about her black,
violent moods in her letters, journals, poems, and autobiographical novel
The Bell Jar. When she was twenty years old, Plath made a nearly lethal
suicide attempt; ten years later she killed herself with carbon monoxide.
The poems she wrote just before her death were, said Robert Lowell, “the
autobiography of a fever.”
2 Reserpine: J. M. Davis, “Central Biogenic Amines and Theories of
Depression and Mania,” in W. F. Fann, I. Karacan, A. D. Pokorny, and R. L.
Williams, eds., Phenomenology and Treatment of Depression (New York:
Spectrum, 1977).

3 iproniazid: N. S. Kline, “Clinical Experience with Iproniazid (Marsilid),”
Journal of Clinical Experimental Psychopathology 19 (Suppl. 1) (1962).
4 Rats with low serotonin levels: L. Valzelli, S. Bernasconi, and M.
Dalessandro, “Effect of Tryptophan Administration on Spontaneous and P-
CPA-Induced Muricidal Aggression in Laboratory Rats,” Pharmacological
Research Communications, 13 (1981): 891–897.
5 “knockout” mice: D. Brunner and R. Hen, “Insights into the
Neurobiology of Impulsive Behavior from Serotonin Receptor Knockout
Mice,” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 836 (1997): 81–105.
6 Rats and other animals: N. K. Popova, A. V. Kulikov, E.M. Nikulina, E.
Y. Kozlachkova, and G. B. Maslova, “Serotonin Metabolism and
Serotonergic Receptors in Norway Rats Selected for Low Aggressiveness
Towards Man,” Aggressive Behavior, 17 (1991): 207–213.
7 Monkeys with low levels: P. T. Mehlman, J. D. Higley, I. Faucher, A. A.
Lilly, D. M. Taub, J. Vickers, S. J. Suomi, and M. Linnoila, “Low CSF 5-
HIAA Concentrations and Severe Aggression and Impaired Impulse
Control in Nonhuman Primates,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 151
(1994): 1485–1491.
8 If serotonin levels: B. Chamberlain, F. R. Ervin, R. O. Pihl, and S. N.
Young, “The Effect of Raising or Lowering Tryptophan Levels on
Aggression in Vervet Monkeys,” Pharmacology, Biochemistry and
Behavior, 28 (1987): 503–510; K. A. Miczek and P. Donat, “Brain 5-HT
System and Inhibition of Aggressive Behavior,” in T. Archer, P. Bevan, and
A. Cools, eds., Behavioral Pharmacology of 5-HT (Hillsdale, N.J.:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1990), pp. 117–144; P. T. Mehlman, J. D.
Higley, I. Faucher, A. A. Lilly, D. M. Taub, S. Suomi, and M. Linnoila,
“Low CSF 5-HIAA Concentrations and Severe Aggression and Impaired
Impulse Control in Nonhuman Primates,” American Journal of Psychiatry,
151 (1994): 1485–1491.
9 forty-nine free-ranging rhesus monkeys: J. D. Higley, P. T. Mehlman, S.
B. Higley, B. Fernald, J. Vickers, S. G. Lindell, D. M. Taub, S. J. Suomi,
and M. Linnoila, “Excessive Mortality in Young Free-Ranging Male
Nonhuman Primates with Low Cerebrospinal Fluid 5-Hydroxyindoleacetic
Acid Concentrations,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 53 (1996): 537–543.
10 who share with other: B. Eichelman, “Aggressive Behavior: From
Laboratory to Clinic,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 49 (1992): 488–492;
M. Åsberg, “Monoamine Neurotransmitters in Human Aggressiveness and

Violence: A Selective Review,” Criminal Behavior and Mental Health, 4
(1994): 303–327.
11 nonhuman primates and humans: For an excellent review, see J. D.
Higley and M. Linnoila, “Low Central Nervous System Serotonergic
Activity Is Traitlike and Correlates with Impulsive Behavior: A Nonhuman
Primate Model Investigating Genetic and Environmental Influences on
Neurotransmission,” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 836
(1997): 39–56.
12 low CSF 5-HIAA concentrations: Ibid.
13 Primates with low CSF 5-HIAA: P. T. Mehlman, J. D. Higley, I. Faucher,
A. A. Lilly, D. M. Taub, J. Vickers, S. J. Suomi, and M. Linnoila,
“Correlation of CSF 5-HIAA Concentration with Sociality and the Timing
of Emigration in Free-Ranging Primates,” American Journal of Psychiatry,
152 (1995): 907–913; J. D. Higley, S. T. King, M. F. Hasert, M. Champoux,
S. J. Suomi, and M. Linnoila, “Stability of Interindividual Differences in
Serotonin Function and Its Relationship to Aggressive Wounding and
Competent 
Social 
Behavior 
in 
Rhesus 
Macaque 
Females,”
Neuropsychopharmacology, 14 (1996): 67–76; P. T. Mehlman, J. D.
Highley, B. J. Fernald, F. R. Sallee, S. J. Suomi, and M. Linnoila, “CSF 5-
HIAA, Testosterone, and Sociosexual Behaviors in Free-Ranging Male
Rhesus Macaques in the Mating Season,” Psychiatry Research, 72 (1997):
89–102.
14 Genes certainly are important: D. Nielsen, D. Goldman, M. Virkkunen,
R. Tukola, R. Rawlings, and M. Linnoila, “Suicidality and 5-
Hydroxindoleacetic Acid Concentration Associated with a Tryptophan
Hydroxylase Polymorphism,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 51 (1994):
34–38; E. F. Coccaro, C. S. Bergeman, R. J. Kavoussi, and A. D.
Seroczynski, “Heritability of Aggression and Irritability: A Twin Study of
the Buss-Durkee Aggression Scales in Adult Male Subjects,” Biological
Psychiatry, 41 (1997): 273–284; J. J. Mann, K. M. Malone, D. A. Nielsen,
D. Goldman, J. Erdos, and J. Gelernter, “Possible Association of a
Polymorphism of the Tryptophan Hydroxylase Gene with Suicidal
Behavior in Depressed Patients,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 154
(1997): 1451–1453; F. Bellivier, M. Leboyer, P. Courtet, C. Buresi, B.
Beaufils, D. Samolyk, J.-F. Allilaire, J. Feingold, J. Mallet, and A.
Malafosse, “Association Between the Tryptophan Hydroxylase Gene and
Manic-Depressive Illness,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 55 (1998): 33–
37; P. Courtet, C. Buresi, M. Abbar, J. P. Boulenger, D. Castelnau, and A.

Malafosse, “Association Between the Tryptophan Hydroxylase Gene and
Suicidal Behavior,” poster presented at the American College of
Neuropsychopharmacology Annual Meeting, San Juan, Puerto Rico,
December 1998; D. A. Nielsen, M. Virkkunen, J. Lappalainen, M. Eggert,
G. L. Brown, J. C. Long, D. Goldman, and M. Linnoila, “A Tryptophan
Hydroxylase Gene Marker for Suicidality and Alcoholism,” Archives of
General Psychiatry, 55 (1998): 593–602.
15 Adult male vervet monkeys: M. J. Raleigh, M. T. McGuire, G. L.
Brammer, and A. Yuwiler, “Social and Environmental Influences on Blood
Serotonin Concentrations in Monkeys,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 41
(1984): 405–410.
16 Studies of rhesus monkeys: These studies are summarized and
referenced in J. D. Higley and M. Linnoila, “Low Central Nervous System
Serotonergic Activity Is Traitlike and Correlates with Impulsive Behavior:
A Nonhuman Primate Model Investigating Genetic and Environmental
Influences on Neurotransmission,” Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 836 (1997): 39–56.
17 While it is unlikely: The argument against oversimplification is well
outlined in G. W. Kraemer, D. E. Schmidt, and M. H. Ebert, “The
Behavioral Neurobiology of Self-Injurious Behavior in Rhesus Monkeys:
Current Concepts and Relations to Impulsive Behavior in Humans,” Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences, 836 (1997): 12–38.
18 More than half of suicide attempts: A review of eight studies shows that
one-third to four-fifths of suicidal acts occurred with little premeditation.
The modal figure was two-thirds. See C. L. Williams, J. A. Davidson, and I.
Montgomery, “Impulsive Suicidal Behavior,” Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 36 (1980): 90–94.
19 many researchers and clinicians: A. Apter, R. Plutchik, and H. M. van
Praag, “Anxiety, Impulsivity and Depressed Mood in Relation to Suicidal
and Violent Behavior,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 87 (1993): 1–5; P.
Nordström, P. Gustavsson, G. Edman, and M. Åsberg, “Temperamental
Vulnerability and Suicide Risk After Attempted Suicide,” Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior, 26 (1996): 380–394.
20 Professional handwriting analysts: C. J. Frederick, “An Investigation of
Handwriting of Suicide Persons Through Suicide Notes,” Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 73 (1968): 263–267.
21 Suicidal patients, in addition: M. Weissman, K. Fox, and G. L. Klerman,

“Hostility and Depression Associated with Suicide Attempts,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 130 (1973): 450–455; J. A. Yesavage, “Direct and
Indirect Hostility and Self-Destructive Behavior by Hospitalized
Depressives,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 68 (1983): 345–350; J.
Angst and P. Clayton, “Premorbid Personality of Depressive, Bipolar, and
Schizophrenic Patients with Special Reference to Suicidal Issues,”
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 27 (1986): 511–532; A. J. Botsis, C. R.
Soldatos, A. Liossi, A. Kokkevi, and C. N. Stephanis, “Suicide and
Violence Risk: I. Relationship to Coping Styles,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 89 (1994): 92–96; M. Åsberg, “Neurotransmitters and
Suicidal Behavior: The Evidence from Cerebrospinal Fluid Studies,”
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 836 (1998): 158–181; J. J.
Mann, C. Waternaux, G. L. Haas, and K. M. Malone, “Toward a Clinical
Model of Suicidal Behavior in Psychiatric Patients,” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 156 (1999): 181–189.
22 those who actually killed themselves: B. M. Barraclough, J. Bunch, B.
Nelson, and P. Sainsbury, “A Hundred Cases of Suicide: Clinical Aspects,”
British Journal of Psychiatry, 125 (1974): 355–372.
23 homicide is frequently followed: D. J. West, Murder Followed by
Suicide (London: Heinemann, 1966); J. Hansen and O. Bjarneson,
“Homicide in Iceland,” Forensic Sciences, 4 (1974): 107–117; S. Dalmer
and J. A. Humphrey, “Offender-Victim Relationships in Criminal Homicide
Followed by Offenders’ Suicide: North Carolina 1972–1977,” Suicide and
Life-Threatening Behavior, 10 (1980): 106–118; H. Petursson and G. H.
Gudjonsson, “Psychiatric Aspects of Homicide,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 64 (1981): 363–372; N. H. Allen, “Homicide Followed by
Suicide: Los Angeles, 1970–1979,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior,
13 (1983): 155–165; J. Coid, “The Epidemiology of Abnormal Homicide
and Murder Followed by Suicide,” Psychological Medicine, 13 (1983):
855–860; D. C. Blanchard and R. J. Blanchard, “Affect and Aggression: An
Animal Model Applied to Human Behavior,” in R. J. Blanchard and D. C.
Blanchard, eds., Advances in the Study of Aggression, vol. 1 (New York:
Academic Press, 1984).
24 Nearly 50 percent of all manic episodes: Based on a review of studies in
F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison, Manic-Depressive Illness (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1990), pp. 35–37; see also G. Winokur, P. J.
Clayton, and T. Reich, Manic Depressive Illness (St. Louis: C. V. Mosby,
1969).

25 a link between serotonin functioning: In addition to the animal studies
cited earlier, see also M. Åsberg, D. Schalling, L. Träskman-Bendz, and A.
Wagner, “Psychobiology of Suicide, Impulsivity, and Related Phenomena,”
in H. Y. Meltzer, ed., Psychopharmacology: The Third Generation of
Progress (New York: Raven Press, 1987), pp. 655–668; E. F. Coccaro,
“Central Serotonin and Impulsive Aggression,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 155 (1989): 52–62; M. Virkkunen, J. De Jong, J. Bartko, and M.
Linnoila, “Psychobiological Concomitants of History of Suicide Attempts
Among Violent Offenders and Impulsive Fire Setters,” Archives of General
Psychiatry, 46 (1989): 604–606; G. L. Brown and M. I. Linnoila, “CSF
Serotonin Metabolite (5-HIAA) Studies in Depression, Impulsivity, and
Violence,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 51 (1990): 31–41.
26 one of the most replicated findings: G. L. Brown, F. K. Goodwin, J. C.
Ballenger, P. F. Goyer, and L. F. Major, “Aggression in Humans Correlates
with Cerebrospinal Fluid Amine Metabolites,” Psychiatry Research, 1
(1979): 131–139; G. L. Brown, F. K. Goodwin, and W. E. Bunney, “Human
Aggression and Suicide: Their Relationship to Neuropsychiatric Diagnoses
and 
Serotonin 
Metabolism,” 
Advances 
in 
Biochemistry 
and
Psychopharmacology, 34 (1982): 287–307; H. van Praag, “Depression,
Suicide, and Metabolism of Serotonin in the Brain,” Journal of Affective
Disorders, 4 (1982): 275–290; C. M. Banki and M. Arató, “Relationship
Between Cerebrospinal Fluid Amine Metabolites, Neuroendocrine Findings
and Personality Dimensions (Marke-Nyman Scale Factors) in Psychiatric
Patients,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 67 (1983): 272–280; P. T.
Ninan, D. P. van Kammen, M. Scheinin, M. Linnoila, W. E. Bunney, Jr., and
F. K. Goodwin, “CSF 5-Hydroxyindoleacetic Acid Levels in Suicidal
Schizophrenic Patients,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 141 (1984): 566–
569; R. Limson, D. Goldman, A. Roy, et al., “Personality and Cerebrospinal
Fluid Monoamine Metabolites in Alcoholics and Controls,” Archives of
General Psychiatry, 48 (1991): 437–441.
27 Although some scientists have questioned: W. Annitto and B. Shopsin,
“Neuropharmacology of Mania,” in B. Shopsin, ed., Manic Illness (New
York: Academic Press, 1979), pp. 105–164; D. Healy, “The Fluoxetine and
Suicide Controversy: A Review of the Evidence,” CNS Drugs, 1 (1994):
223–231.
28 more than twenty studies: M. Åsberg, “Neurotransmitters and Suicidal
Behavior: The Evidence from Cerebrospinal Fluid Studies,” Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, 836 (1997): 158–181.

29 if CSF 5-HIAA is measured: L. Träskman, M. Åsberg, L. Bertilsson, and
L. Sjöstrand, “Monoamine Metabolities in CSF and Suicidal Behavior,”
Archives of General Psychiatry, 38 (1981): 631–636; A. Roy, H. Ågren, D.
Pickar, M. Linnoila, A. R. Doran, N. R. Cutler, and S. M. Paul, “Reduced
CSF Concentrations of Homovanillic Acid and Homovanillic Acid to 5-
Hydroxyindoleacetic Acid Ratios in Depressed Patients: Relationship to
Suicidal Behavior and Dexamethasone Non-Suppression,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 143 (1986): 1539–1545; P. Nordström, M.
Samuelsson, M. Åberg-Wistedt, C. Nordin, and L. Bertilsson, “CSF 5-
HIAA Predicts Suicide Risk After Attempted Suicide,” Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior, 24 (1994): 1–9.
30 psychiatric and behavioral syndromes: D. J. Cohen, B. A. Shaywitz, B.
Caparulo, J. G. Young, and M. B. Bowers, “Chronic, Multiple Tics of Gilles
de la Tourette’s Disease: CSF Acid Monoamine Metabolites After
Probenecid Administration,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 35 (1978):
245–250; M. Åsberg, P. Thorén, and L. Bertilsson, “Clomipramine
Treatment of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder—Biochemical and Clinical
Aspects,” Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 18 (1982): 13–21; G. L. Brown,
M. H. Ebert, P. F. Goyer, D. C. Jimerson, W. J. Klein, W. E. Bunney, and F.
K. Goodwin, “Aggression, Suicide, and Serotonin: Relationships to CSF
Amine Metabolites,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 139 (1982): 741–
746; M. Linnoila, M. Virkkunen, M. Scheinin, A. Nuutila, R. Rimon, and F.
K. Goodwin, “Low Cerebrospinal Fluid 5-Hydroxyindoleacetic Acid
Concentration Differentiates Impulsive from Nonimpulsive Violent
Behavior,” Life Sciences, 33 (1983): 2609–2614; W. H. Kaye, M. H. Ebert,
H. E. Gwirtsman, and S. R. Weiss, “Differences in Brain Serotonergic
Metabolism Between Nonbulimic and Bulimic Patients with Anorexia
Nervosa,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 141 (1984): 1598–1601; T. R.
Insel, E. A. Mueller, I. Alterman, M. Linnoila, and D. L. Murphy,
“Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder and Serotonin: Is There a Connection?”
Biological Psychiatry, 20 (1985): 1174–1188; H. M. Van Praag, “Affective
Disorders and Aggression Disorders: Evidence for a Common Biological
Mechanism,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 16 (1986): 103–132;
M. J. Kruesi, “Cruelty to Animals and CSF 5-HIAA,” Psychiatry Research,
28 (1989): 115–116; D. C. Jimerson, M. D. Lessem, W. H. Kaye, A. P.
Hegg, and T. D. Brewerton, “Eating Disorders and Depression: Is There a
Serotonin Connection?” Biological Psychiatry, 28 (1990): 443–454; M. J.
P. Kruesi, J. L. Rapoport, E. Hibbs, W. Z. Potter, M. Lenane, and G. L.

Brown, 
“Cerebrospinal 
Monoamine 
Metabolites, 
Aggression, 
and
Impulsivity in Disruptive Disorders of Children and Adolescents,” Archives
of General Psychiatry, 47 (1990): 419–426; W. H. Kaye, H. E. Gwirtsman,
D. T. George, and M. H. Ebert, “Altered Serotonin Activity in Anorexia
Nervosa 
After 
Long-Term 
Weight 
Restoration: 
Does 
Elevated
Cerebrospinal Fluid 5-Hydroxyindoleacetic Acid Level Correlate with
Rigid and Obsessive Behavior?” Archives of General Psychiatry, 48
(1991): 556–562; R. Limson, D. Goldman, A. Roy, D. Lamparski, B.
Ravitz, B. Adinoff, and M. Linnoila, “Personality and Cerebrospinal Fluid
Monoamine Metabolites in Alcoholics and Controls,” Archives of General
Psychiatry, 48 (1991): 437–441; D. C. Jimerson, M. D. Lesem, W. H. Kaye,
and T. D. Brewerton, “Low Serotonin and Dopamine Metabolite
Concentrations in Cerebrospinal Fluid from Bulimic Patients with Frequent
Binge Episodes,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 49 (1992): 132–138; S.
E. Swedo, H. L. Leonard, M. J. Kruesi, D. C. Rettew, S. J. Listwak, W.
Berettini, M. Stipetic, S. Hamburger, P. W. Gold, W. Z. Potter, and J. L.
Rapoport, “Cerebrospinal Fluid Neurochemistry in Children and
Adolescents with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder,” Archives of General
Psychiatry, 49 (1992): 29–36; M. Virkkunen, E. Kallio, R. Rawlings, R.
Tokola, R. E. Poland, A. Guidotti, C. Nemeroff, G. Bissette, K. Kalogeras,
S. L. Karonen, and M. Linnoila, “Personality Profiles and State
Aggressiveness in Finnish Alcoholics, Violent Offenders, Fire Setters, and
Healthy Volunteers,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 51 (1994): 28–33.
31 Smoking cigarettes: R. S. Paffenbarger Jr. and D. P. Asnes, “Chronic
Disease in Former College Students: III. Precursors of Suicide in Early and
Middle Life,” American Journal of Public Health, 56 (1966): 1026–1036;
P. S. Paffenbarger Jr., S. H. King, and A. L. Wing, “Chronic Disease in
Former College Students: IX. Characteristics in Youth That Predispose to
Suicide and Accidental Death in Later Life,” American Journal of Public
Health, 59 (1969): 900–908; C. B. Thomas, “Suicide Among Us: II. Habits
of Nervous Tension as Potential Predictors,” Hopkins Medical Journal, 129
(1971): 190–201; C. B. Thomas, “Precursors of Premature Disease and
Death: The Predictive Potential of Habits and Family Attitudes,” Annals of
Internal Medicine, 85 (1976): 653–658; K. M. Malone, C. Waternaux, G. L.
Haas, and J. J. Mann, “Alcohol Abuse, Cigarette Smoking, Suicidal
Behavior and Serotonin Function,” Biological Psychiatry, 41 (Suppl.)
(1997): 9; J. Angst and P. J. Clayton, “Personality, Smoking and Suicide,”
Journal of Affective Disorders, 51 (1998): 55–62; P. Clayton, “Smoking and

Suicide,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 50 (1998): 1–2; J. J. Mann, C.
Waternaux, G. L. Haas, and K. M. Malone, “Toward a Clinical Model of
Suicidal Behavior in Psychiatric Patients,” American Journal of Psychiatry,
156 (1999): 181–189.
32 postmortem studies: M. Stanley and B. Stanley, “Biochemical Studies in
Suicide Victims: Current Findings and Future Implications,” Suicide and
Life-Threatening Behavior, 19 (1989): 30–42; J. E. Kleinman, T. M. Hyde,
and M. M. Herman, “Methodological Issues in the Neuropathology of
Mental 
Illness,” 
in 
F. 
E. 
Bloom 
and 
D. 
J. 
Kupfer, 
eds.,
Psychopharmacology: The Fourth Generation of Progress (New York:
Raven Press, 1995), pp. 859–864; V. Arango, M. D. Underwood, and J. J.
Mann, “Fewer Pigmented Locus Ceruleus Neurons in Suicide Victims:
Preliminary Results,” Biological Psychiatry, 39 (1996): 112–120; V.
Arango, M. D. Underwood, and J. J. Mann, “Postmortem Findings in
Suicide Victims: Implications for In Vivo Imaging Studies,” Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, 836 (1997): 269–287; S. E. Bachus, T. M.
Hyde, M. Akil, C. Shannon Weickert, M. P. Vawter, and J. E. Kleinman,
“Neuropathology of Suicide: A Review and an Approach,” Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, 836 (1997): 201–219; J. F. López, D. M.
Vázquez, D. T. Chalmers, and S. J. Watson, “Regulation of 5-HT Receptors
and the Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis,” Annals of the New York
Academy 
of 
Sciences, 
836 
(1997): 
106–134; 
G. 
A. 
Ordway,
“Pathophysiology of the Locus Coeruleus in Suicide,” Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences, 836 (1997): 233–252; J. J. Mann and V. Arango,
“The Neurobiology of Suicidal Behavior,” in D. G. Jacobs, The Harvard
Medical School Guide to Suicide Assessment and Intervention (San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1999): 98–114.
33 Rats, if subjected: P. Rosenfeld, Y. R. Gutierrez, A. M. Martin, H. A.
Mallet, E. Alleva, and S. Levine, “Maternal Regulation of the
Adrenocortical Response in Preweanling Rats,” Physiology and Behavior,
50 (1991): 661–671; D. M. Vázquez and H. Akil, “Pituitary-Adrenal
Response to Ether Vapor in the Weanling Animal: Characterization of the
Inhibitory Effect of Glucocorticoids on Adrenocorticotropin Secretion,”
Pediatric Research, 34 (1993): 646–653; S. Levine, “The Ontogeny of the
Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis: The Influence of Maternal Factors,”
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 746 (1994): 275–288; C. O.
Ladd, M. J. Owens, and C. B. Nemeroff, “Persistent Changes in
Corticotropin-Releasing Factor Neuronal Systems Induced by Maternal

Deprivation,” Endocrinology, 137 (1996): 1212–1218.
34 Autopsy studies: K. Dorovini-Zis and A. P. Zis, “Increased Adrenal
Weight in Victims of Violent Suicide,” Endocrinology, 144 (1987): 1214–
1215; C. B. Nemeroff, M. J. Owens, G. Bissette, A. C. Andorn, and M.
Stanley, “Reduced Corticotropin Releasing Factor Binding Sites in the
Frontal Cortex of Suicide Victims,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 45
(1988): 577–579; M. Arato, C. M. Banki, G. Bissette, and C. B. Nemeroff,
“Elevated CSF CRF in Suicide Victims,” Biological Psychiatry, 25 (1989):
355–359; J. F. López, M. Palkovits, M. Arato, A. Mansour, H. Akil, and S.
J. Watson, “Localization and Quantification of Pro-Opiomelanocortin
mRNA and Glucocorticoid Receptor mRNA in Pituitaries of Suicide
Victims,” Neuroendocrinology, 56 (1992): 491–501; E. Szigethy, Y.
Conwell, N. T. Forbes, C. Cox, and E. D. Caine, “Adrenal Weight and
Morphology in Victims of Completed Suicide,” Biological Psychiatry, 36
(1994): 374–380.
35 enlargement of the amygdala: L. L. Altshuler, G. Bartzokis, T. Grieder,
J. Curran, and J. Mintz, “Amygdala Enlargement in Bipolar Disorder and
Hippocampal Reduction in Schizophrenia: An MRI Study Demonstrating
Neuroanatomic Specificity,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 55 (1998):
663–664; S. M. Strakowski, M. P. Del Bello, K. W. Sax, M. E. Zimmerman,
P. K. Shear, J. M. Hawkins, and E. R. Larson, “Brain Magnetic Resonance
Imaging of Structural Abnormalities in Bipolar Disorder,” Archives of
General Psychiatry, 56 (1999): 254–260.
36 increase in white-matter lesions: R. M. Dupont, T. L. Jernigan, and N.
Butters, “Subcortical Abnormalities Detected in Bipolar Affective Disorder
Using Magnetic Resonance Imaging,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 47
(1990): 55–59; V. W. Swayze, N. C. Andreasen, R. J. Alliger, J. C.
Ehrhardt, and W. T. Yuh, “Structural Brain Abnormalities in Bipolar
Affective 
Disorder: 
Ventricular 
Enlargement 
and 
Focal 
Signal
Hyperintensities,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 47 (1990): 1054–1059;
G. S. Figiel, K. R. R. Krishnan, V. P. Rao, M. Doraiswamy, E. H.
Ellinwood, C. B. Nemeroff, D. Evans, and O. Boyko, “Subcortical
Hyperintensities on Brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging: A Comparison of
Normal and Bipolar Subjects,” Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical
Neuroscience, 3 (1991): 18–22; S. M. Strakowski, B. T. Woods, M. Tohen,
D. R. Wilson, A. W. Douglass, and A. L. Stoll, “MRI Subcortical
Hyperintensities in Mania at First Hospitalization,” Biological Psychiatry,
33 (1993): 204–206; E. P. Ahearn, D. C. Steffens, F. Cassidy, S. A. Van

Meter, J. M. Provenzale, M. F. Seldin, R. H. Weisler, and K. R. R.
Krishnan, “Family Leukoencephalopathy in Bipolar Disorder,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 155 (1998): 1605–1607.
37 severe depletions: D. Öngür, W. C. Drevets, and J. L. Price, “Glial
Reduction in the Subgenual Prefrontal Cortex in Mood Disorders,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 95 (1998): 13290–
13295.
38 brains of patients with chronic schizophrenia: A. B. Levy, N. Kurtz, and
A. S. Kling, “Association Between Cerebral Ventricular Enlargement and
Suicide Attempts in Chronic Schizophrenia,” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 141 (1984): 438–439.
39 white-matter lesions: O. L. Lopez, J. T. Becker, C. F. Reynolds, C. A.
Jungreis, S. Weinman, and S. T. De Kosky, “Psychiatric Correlates of MR
Deep White Matter Lesions in Probable Alzheimer’s Disease,” Journal of
Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 9 (1997): 246–250.
40 hyperintensities in the periventricular region: Personal communication
from Dr. Eileen Ahearn, March 8, 1999.
41 Concerned by reports: D. Jacobs, H. Blackburn, M. Higgins, D. Reed, H.
Iso, G. McMillan, J. Neaton, J. Nelson, J. Potter, B. Rifkind, J. Rossouw, R.
Shekelle, and S. Yusuf, “Report of the Conference on Low Blood
Cholesterol: Mortality Associations,” Circulation, 86 (1992): 1046–1060;
M. F. Muldoon and S. B. Manuck, “Health Through Cholesterol Reduction:
Are There Unforeseen Risks?” Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 14 (1992):
101–108; J. D. Neaton, H. Blackburn, D. Jacobs, L. Kuller, D. J. Lee, R.
Sherwin, J. Shih, J. Stamler, and D. Wentworth, “Serum Cholesterol Level
and Mortality Findings for Men Screened in the Multiple Risk Factor
Intervention Trial,” Archives of Internal Medicine, 152 (1992): 1490–1500;
M. F. Muldoon, J. Rossouw, S. B. Manuck, C. J. Glueck, J. R. Kaplan and
P. Kaufmann, “Low or Lowered Cholesterol and Risk of Death from
Suicide and Trauma,” Metabolism, 42 (Suppl. 1) (1993): 45–56.
42 Not every study: For reviews of the cholesterol-suicide link, see P. F.
Boston, S. M. Durson, and M. A. Reveley, “Cholesterol and Mental
Disorder,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 169 (1996): 682–689; and M.
Hillbrand and R. T. Spitz, eds., Lipids, Health, and Behavior (Washington,
D.C.: American Psychological Association, 1997).
43 simply an artifact: K. Hawton, P. Cowen, D. Owens, et al., “Low Serum
Cholesterol and Suicide,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 162 (1993): 818–

825.
44 a few studies: N. Takei, H. Kunugi, S. Nanko, H. Aoki, R. Iyo, and H.
Kazamatsuri, “Low Serum Cholesterol and Suicide Attempts,” British
Journal of Psychiatry, 164 (1994): 702–703; J. Fawcett, K. A. Busch, D.
Jacobs, H. M. Kravitz, and L. Fogg, “Suicide: A Four-Pathway Clinical-
Biochemical Model,” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 836
(1997): 288–301.
45 Other scientists: J. R. Kaplan, S. B. Manuck, M. Fontenot, M. F.
Muldoon, C. A. Shively, and J. J. Mann, “The Cholesterol-Serotonin
Hypothesis: Interrelationships Among Dietary Lipids, Central Serotonergic
Activity, and Social Behavior in Monkeys,” in M. Hillbrand and R. T. Spitz,
eds., Lipids, Health, and Behavior (Washington, D.C.: American
Psychological Association, 1997), pp. 139–165; J. R. Kaplan, M. F.
Muldoon, S. B. Manuck, and J. J. Mann, “Assessing the Observed
Relationship Between Low Cholesterol and Violence-Related Mortality,”
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 836 (1997): 57–80.
46 important lipid players: M. E. Virkkunen, D. F. Horrobin, D. K. Jenkins,
and M. S. Manku, “Plasma Phospholipids, Essential Fatty Acids and
Prostaglandins in Alcoholic, Habitually Violent and Impulsive Offenders,”
Biological Psychiatry, 22 (1987): 1087–1096; T. Hirayama, Life-Style and
Mortality (Basel: Karger, 1990); J. R. Hibbeln and N. Salem, “Dietary
Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and Depression: When Cholesterol Does Not
Satisfy,” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 62 (1995): 1–9; J. R.
Hibbeln, M. Linnoila, J. C. Umhau, R. Rawlings, D. T. George, and N.
Salem, “Essential Fatty Acids Predict Metabolites of Serotonin and
Dopamine in Cerebrospinal Fluid Among Healthy Control Subjects and
Early- and Late-Onset Alcoholics,” Biological Psychiatry, 44 (1998): 235–
242; J. R. Hibbeln, J. C. Umhau, M. Linnoila, D. T. George, P. R. Ragan, S.
E. Shoaf, M. R. Vaughan, R. Rawlings, and N. Salem, “A Replication Study
of Violent and Nonviolent Subjects: Cerebrospinal Fluid Metabolites of
Serotonin and Dopamine Are Predicted by Plasma Essential Fatty Acids,”
Biological Psychiatry, 44 (1998): 243–249; D. Horrobin and C. N. Bennett,
“New Gene Targets Related to Schizophrenia and Other Psychiatric
Disorders: Enzymes, Binding Proteins and Transport Proteins Involved in
Phospholipid and Fatty Acid Metabolism,” Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes
and Essential Fatty Acids, 60 (1999): 141–167.
47 Societies that consume: J. R. Hibbeln, “Fish Consumption and Major
Depression,” Lancet, 351 (1998): 1213.

48 Paleolithic and modern: B. S. Eaton and M. Konner, “Paleolithic
Nutrition: A Consideration of Its Nature and Current Implications,” New
England Journal of Medicine, 312 (1985): 283–289.
49 fatty acid metabolism and schizophrenia: D. F. Horrobin, “The
Membrane Phospholipid Hypothesis as a Biochemical Basis for the
Neurodevelopmental Concept of Schizophrenia,” Schizophrenia Research,
30 (1998): 193–208.
50 Australian aborigines: S. J. Pyne, World Fire: The Culture of Fire on
Earth (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1995), p. 31.
51 “Suicide, I suspect”: J. Conrad, Chance: A Tale in Two Parts (Garden
City, N.Y.: Doubleday, Page & Company, 1926), p. 183.
52 John Mann: J. J. Mann, C. Waternaux, G. L. Haas, and K. M. Malone,
“Toward a Clinical Model of Suicidal Behavior in Psychiatric Patients,”
American Journal of Psychiatry, 156 (1999): 181–189.
53 “the attacks of manic-depressive insanity”: E. Kraepelin, Manic-
Depressive Insanity and Paranoia, trans. R. M. Barclay, ed. G. M.
Robertson (New York: Arno Press, 1976; first published, 1921), p. 181.
54 Suicide, we know, is rare: D. Shaffer, “Suicide in Childhood and Early
Adolescence,” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 15 (1974):
275–291; D. Shaffer and P. Fisher, “The Epidemiology of Suicide in
Children and Young Adolescents,” Journal of the American Academy of
Child Psychiatry, 20 (1981): 545–565; C. R. Pfeffer, R. Plutchik, M. S.
Mizruchi, and R. Lipkins, “Suicidal Behavior in Child Psychiatric
Inpatients and Outpatients and in Nonpatients,” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 143 (1986): 733–738; H. M. Hoberman and B. D. Garfinkel,
“Completed Suicide in Youth,” Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 33 (1988):
494–504; R. Harrington, H. Rudge, M. Rutter, A. Pickles, and J. Hill,
“Adult Outcomes of Childhood and Adolescent Depression,” Archives of
General Psychiatry, 47 (1990): 465–473; M. Kovacs, D. Goldston, and C.
Gatsonis, “Suicidal Behaviors and Childhood-Onset Depressive Disorders:
A Longitudinal Investigation,” Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 32 (1993): 8–20; U. Rao, M. M. Weissman, J.
A. Martin, and R. W. Hammond, “Childhood Depression and Risk of
Suicide: A Preliminary Report of a Longitudinal Study,” Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 32 (1993): 21–27;
C. R. Pfeffer, S. W. Hurt, T. Kakuma, J. R. Peskin, C. A. Siefker, and S.
Nagabhairava, “Suicidal Children Grow Up: Suicidal Episodes and Effects

of Treatment During Follow-up,” Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 33 (1994): 225–230; D. N. Klein, P. M.
Lewinsohn, and J. R. Seeley, “Hypomanic Personality Traits in a
Community Sample of Adolescents,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 38
(1996): 135–143. There were, however, disturbingly high rates of suicide in
young children during the fifteenth through eighteenth centuries in
England; see M. MacDonald and T. R. Murphy, Sleepless Souls: Suicide in
Early Modern England (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990), pp. 248–252.
55 believe that death is reversible: M. S. McIntyre and C. A. Angle, “The
Child’s Concept of Death,” paper presented at the Workshop in
Methodology, Ambulatory Pediatric Society, Atlantic City, N.J., April
1970; M. W. Speece and S. B. Brent, “Children’s Understanding of Death:
A Review of Three Components of a Death Concept,” Child Development,
55 (1984): 1671–1686; C. R. Pfeffer, The Suicidal Child (New York:
Guilford, 1986); D. Gothelf, A. Apter, A. Brand-Gothelf, N. Offer, H. Ofek,
S. Tyano, and C. R. Pfeffer, “Death Concepts in Suicidal Adolescents,”
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 37
(1998): 1279–1286.
56 average age of onset: F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison, Manic-
Depressive Illness (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990); L. N.
Robins and D. A. Regier, Psychiatric Disorders in America: The
Epidemiologic Catchment Area Study (New York: Free Press, 1991).
57 Gender, as well as age: The nature and extent of gender differences in
suicide rates were discussed in Chapter 2 and differences in choice of
methods in Chapter 5; see also C. L. Rich, J. E. Ricketts, R. C. Fowler, and
D. Young, “Some Differences Between Men and Women Who Commit
Suicide,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 145 (1988): 718–722; S. S.
Canetto and D. Lester, eds., Women and Suicidal Behavior (New York:
Springer, 1995); S. S. Canetto, “Gender and Suicidal Behavior: Theories
and Evidence,” in R. W. Maris, M. M. Silverman, and S. S. Canetto, Review
of Suicidology, 1997 (New York: Guilford Press, 1997), pp. 138–167.
58 blood levels of serotonin: S. O’Reilly and M. Loncin, “Ceruloplasmin
and 5-Hydroxindole Metabolism in Pregnancy,” American Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, 98 (1967): 8–14; M. Uluitu, L. Dusleag, D.
Constantinescu, G. Petcu, G. Catrinescu, and S. Pana, “Serotonin Through
Pregnancy: Comparative Researches in Different Species and in Mankind,”
Physiologie, 12 (1975): 275–280.

59 lower rate of suicide: G. J. Kleiner and W. M. Greston, eds., Suicide in
Pregnancy (London: John Wright, 1984); A. L. Dannenberg, D. M. Carter,
H. W. Lawson, D. M. Ashton, S. F. Dorfman, and E. H. Graham,
“Homicide and Other Injuries as Causes of Maternal Death in New York
City, 1987 through 1991,” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
172 (1995): 1557–1564; P. M. Marzuk, K. Tardiff, A. C. Leon, C. S. Hirsch,
L. Portera, N. Hartwell, and M. Irfan Iqbal, “Lower Risk of Suicide During
Pregnancy,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 154 (1997): 122–123.
60 in the year following childbirth: L. Appleby, “Suicide During Pregnancy
and in the First Postnatal Year,” British Medical Journal, 302 (1991): 137–
140; L. Appleby, P. B. Mortensen, and E. B. Faragher, “Suicide and Other
Causes of Mortality After Post-Partum Psychiatric Admission,” British
Journal of Psychiatry, 173 (1998): 209–211; L. Appleby and G. Turnbull,
“Parasuicide in the First Postnatal Year,” Psychological Medicine, 173
(1998): 209–211.
61 different phases of the mentrual cycle: A. J. Mandell and M. P. Mandell,
“Suicide and the Menstrual Cycle,” Journal of the American Medical
Association, 200 (1967): 792–793; R. D. Wetzel, T. Reich, and J. N.
McClure, “Phase of the Menstrual Cycle and Self-Referrals to a Suicide
Prevention Service,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 119 (1971): 523–524; E.
Baca-García, A. Sánchez González, P. González Diaz-Corralero, I.
González Garcia, and J. de Leon, “Menstrual Cycle and Profiles of Suicidal
Behaviour,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 97 (1998): 32–35.
62 A London autopsy study: P. C. B. MacKinnon and I. L. MacKinnon,
“Hazards of the Menstrual Cycle,” British Medical Journal, (1956): 555.
63 Autopsies of Hindu women: A. L. Ribeiro, “Menstruation and Crime,”
British Medical Journal, 1 (1962): 640.
64 low levels of estrogen: V. Fourestié, B. de Lignières, F. Roudot-
Thoraval, I. Fulli-Lemaire, D. Cremniter, K. Nahoul, S. Fournier, and I.-L.
Lejone, “Suicide Attempts in Hypo-Estrogenic Phases of the Menstrual
Cycle,” Lancet, 2 (1986): 1357–1360.
65 more than 180,000: C. Pritchard, “A Comparison of Youth Suicide in
Hong Kong, the Developed World, and the People’s Republic of China,”
Hong Kong Journal of Mental Health, 22 (1993): 6–16; World Bank, World
Development Report 1993: Investing in Health (New York: Oxford
University Press for the World Bank, 1993); C. J. L. Murray and A. D.
Lopez, The Global Burden of Disease (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard

University Press, 1996); C. Pritchard, “Suicide in the People’s Republic of
China Categorized by Age and Gender: Evidence of the Influence of
Culture on Suicide,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 93 (1996): 362–367;
P. Brown, “No Way Out,” New Scientist, March 22, 1997, pp. 34–37; E.
Rosenthal, “Women’s Suicides Reveal Rural China’s Bitter Roots,” New
York Times, January 24, 1999.
66 Most suicides occur: E. Morselli, Suicide: An Essay on Comparative
Moral Statistics (London: Kegan Paul, 1881); C. P. Seager and R. A. Flood,
“Suicide in Bristol,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 111 (1965): 919–932; D.
R. Nalin, “Epidemic of Suicide by Malathion Poisoning in Guyana: Report
of 264 Cases,” Tropical Geographical Medicine, 25 (1973): 8–14; J. R.
Aston and S. Donnan, “Suicide by Burning as an Epidemic Phenomenon:
An Analysis of 82 Deaths and Inquests in England and Wales in 1978–9,”
Psychological Medicine, 11 (1981): 735–739; D. De Maio, F. Carpenter,
and C. Riva, “Evaluation of Circadian, Circsepten and Cirannual
Periodicity of Attempted Suicides,” Chronobiologia, 9 (1982): 185–193; D.
W. Johnston and J. P. Waddell, “Death and Injury Patterns: Toronto Subway
System,” Journal of Trauma, 24 (1984): 619–622; P. Williams and M.
Tansella, “The Time for Suicide,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 75
(1987): 532–535; R. Hanzlick, K. Masterson, and B. Walker, “Suicide by
Jumping from High-Rise Hotels: Fulton County, Georgia, 1967–1986,”
American Journal of Forensic Medicine and Pathology, 11 (1990): 294–
297; Y. Motohashi, “Circadian Variation in Suicide Attempts in Tokyo from
1978 to 1985,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 20 (1990): 352–
361; G. Maldonado and J. F. Kraus, “Variation in Suicide Occurrence by
Time of Day, Day of the Week, Month, and Lunar Phase,” Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior, 21 (1991): 174–187; I. O’Donnell and R. D. T.
Farmer, “Suicidal Acts on Metro Systems: An International Perspective,”
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 86 (1992): 60–63; M. Gallerani, F. M.
Avato, D. Dal Monte, S. Caracciolo, C. Fersini, and R. Manfredi, “The
Time for Suicide,” Psychological Medicine, 26 (1996): 867–870; L. B.
Lerer and R. G. Matzopoulos, “Fatal Railway Injuries in Cape Town, South
Africa,” American Journal of Forensic Medicine and Pathology, 18 (1997):
144–147; C. Altamura, A. VanGastel, R. Pioli, P. Mannu, and M. Maes,
“Seasonal and Circadian Rhythms in Suicide in Cagliari, Italy,” Journal of
Affective Disorders, 53 (1999): 77–85.
67 “Shocks and reverses”: S. A. K. Strahan, Suicide and Insanity: A
Physiological and Sociological Study (London: Swan Sonnenschein & Co.,

1893), p. 158.
68 Hospital suicides: G. R. Jameison and J. H. Wall, “Some Psychiatric
Aspects of Suicide,” Psychiatric Quarterly, 7 (1933): 211–229; L. S.
Lipschutz, “Some Administrative Aspects of Suicide in the Mental
Hospital,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 99 (1942): 181–187; A. D.
Pokorny, “Characteristics of Forty-Four Patients Who Subsequently
Committed Suicide,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 2 (1960): 314–323;
A. R. Beisser and J. E. Blanchette, “A Study of Suicides in a Mental
Hospital,” Diseases of the Nervous System, 22 (1961): 365–369; P. H.
Salmons, “Suicide in High Buildings,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 145
(1984): 469–472.
69 the well-established diurnal variation: G. Winokur, P. J. Clayton, and T.
Reich, Manic Depressive Illness (St. Louis: C. V. Mosby, 1969); T. A. Wehr
and F. K. Goodwin, eds., Circadian Rhythms in Psychiatry (Pacific Grove,
Calif.: Boxwood Press, 1983); F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison, Manic-
Depressive Illness (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990); A. P. R.
Moffott, R. E. O’Carroll, J. Bennie, S. Carroll, H. Dick, K. P. Ebmeier, and
G. M. Goodwin, “Diurnal Variation of Mood and Neuropsychological
Function in Major Depression with Melancholia,” Journal of Affective
Disorders, 32 (1994): 257–269.
70 Cognitive impairment: R. C. Casper, E. Redmond, M. M. Katz, C. B.
Shaffer, J. M. Davis, and S. H. Koslow, “Somatic Symptoms in Primary
Affective Disorder: Presence and Relationship to the Classification of
Depression,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 42 (1985): 1098–1104.
71 suicide and the lunar cycle: P. K. Jones and S. L. Jones, “Lunar
Association with Suicide,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 7
(1977): 31–39; D. Lester, “Temporal Variation in Suicide and Homicide,”
American Journal of Epidemiology, 109 (1979): 517–520; K. MacMahon,
“Short-Term Temporal Cycles in the Frequency of Suicide, United States,
1972–1978,” American Journal of Epidemiology, 117 (1983): 744–750; G.
Maldonado and J. F. Kraus, “Variation in Suicide Occurrence by Time of
Day, Day of the Week, Month, and Lunar Phase,” Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior, 21 (1991): 174–187.
72 before modern lighting: C. L. Raison, H. M. Klein, and M. Steckler,
“The Moon and Madness Reconsidered,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 53
(1999): 99–106.
73 national holidays: D. Lester and A. T. Beck, “Suicide and National

Holidays,” Psychological Reports, 36 (1975): 52; D. P. Phillips and J. Liu,
“The Frequency of Suicides Around Major Public Holidays: Some
Surprising Findings,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 10 (1980):
41–50; D. P. Phillips and J. S. Wills, “A Drop in Suicides Around Major
National Holidays,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 17 (1987): 1–
12; S. M. Davenport and J. Birtle, “Association Between Parasuicide and
Saint Valentine’s Day,” British Medical Journal, 300 (1990): 783–784; L.
A. Panser, D. E. McAlpine, S. L. Wallrichs, D. W. Swanson, W. M.
O’Fallon, and L. J. Melton, “Timing of Completed Suicides Among
Residents of Olmsted County, Minnesota, 1951–1985,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 92 (1995): 214–219.
74 suicides on Mondays: W. W. K. Zung and R. L. Green, “Seasonal
Variation of Suicide and Depression,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 30
(1974): 89–91; D. Lester, “Temporal Variation in Suicide and Homicide,”
American Journal of Epidemiology, 109 (1979): 517–520; K. Bollen,
“Temporal Variations in Mortality,” Demography, 20 (1983): 45–49; K.
MacMahon, “Short-Term Temporal Cycles in the Frequency of Suicide:
United States, 1972–1978,” American Journal of Epidemiology, 117
(1983): 744–750; J. M. Rothberg and F. D. Jones, “Suicide in the U.S.
Army,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 17 (1987): 119–132; G.
Maldonado and J. F. Kraus, “Variation in Suicide Occurrence by Time of
Day, Day of Week, Month, and Lunar Phase,” Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behavior, 21 (1991): 174–187.
75 a “broken-promise” effect: H. Gabennesch, “When Promises Fail: A
Theory of Temporal Fluctuations in Suicide,” Social Forces, 67 (1988):
129–145.
76 In the late 1800s: E. Morselli, Suicide: An Essay on Comparative Moral
Statistics (London: Kegan Paul, 1881), pp. 56–57.
77 Several years ago: F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison, Manic-Depressive
Illness (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990); J. Zhang, “Suicides in
Beijing, China, 1992–1993,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 26
(1996): 175–180; A. J. Flisher, C. D. H. Parry, D. Bradshaw, and J. M.
Juritz, “Seasonal Variation of Suicide in South Africa,” Psychiatry
Research, 66 (1997): 13–22.
78 in the Southern Hemisphere: M. B. Trucco, “Suicídios en el Gran
Sanriago: II. Variación Estacional,” Revista Clínica Española, 105 (1977):
47–49; G. Parker and S. Walter, “Seasonal Variation in Depressive

Disorders and Suicidal Deaths in New South Wales,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 140 (1982): 626–632; K. S. Y. Chew and R. McCleary, “The
Spring Peak in Suicides: A Cross-National Analysis,” Social Science and
Medicine, 40 (1995): 223–230; A. J. Flisher, C. D. H. Parry, D. Bradshaw,
and J. M. Juritz, “Seasonal Variation of Suicide in South Africa,”
Psychiatry Research, 66 (1979): 13–22.
79 men have one peak: S. M. Kevan, “Perspectives on Season of Suicide: A
Review,” Social Science and Medicine, 14 (1980): 369–378; R. Meares, F.
O. Mendelsohn, and J. Milgrom-Friedman, “A Sex Difference in the
Seasonal Variation of Suicide Rate: A Single Cycle for Men, Two Cycles
for Women,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 138 (1981): 321–325; S. Näyhä,
“The Biseasonal Incidence of Some Suicides,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 67 (1983): 32–42; R. Micciolo, C. Zimmerman-Tansella, P.
Williams, and M. Tansella, “Seasonal Variation in Suicide: Is There a Sex
Difference?” Psychological Medicine, 19 (1989): 199–203; H. Hakko, P.
Räsänen, and J. Tiihonen, “Seasonal Variation in Suicide Occurrence in
Finland,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 98 (1998): 92–97.
80 Sources of data for graph: Morselli, Suicide; Strahan, Suicide and
Insanity; E. Takahaski, “Seasonal Variation of Conception and Suicide,”
Tohoku Journal of Experimental Medicine, 84 (1964): 215–227; M.
MacDonald and T. R. Murphy, Sleepless Souls: Suicide in Early Modern
England (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990); the data for U. S. suicides 1980–
1995 were provided by Dr. Alex Crosby of the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention in Atlanta and Ken Kochanek, M.A., Vital Statistics
Mortality Branch, National Center for Health Statistics, Hyattsville, Md.
81 This lessening in amplitude: K. Dreyer, “Comparative Suicide Statistics:
II. Death Rates from Suicide in Denmark Since 1921, and Seasonal
Variations Since 1835,” Danish Medical Bulletin, 6 (1959): 75–81; W. R.
Lyster, “Seasonal Variation in Suicide Rates,” Lancet, 1 (1973): 725; S. M.
Kevan, “Perspectives on Season of Suicide: A Review,” Social Science and
Medicine, 14 (1980): 369–378; R. Meares, F. A. D. Mendelsohn, and J.
Milgrom-Friedman, “A Sex Difference in the Seasonal Variation of Suicide
Rate: A Single Cycle for Men, Two Cycles for Women,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 138 (1981): 321–325; H. Hakko, P. Rasanen, and J. Tiihonen,
“Secular Trends in the Rates and Seasonality of Violent and Nonviolent
Suicide Occurences in Finland During 1980–1995,” Journal of Affective
Disorders, 50 (1998): 49–54; Z. Rihmer, W. Rutz, H. Pihlgren, and P.
Pestality, “Decreasing Tendency of Seasonality in Suicide May Indicate

Lowering Rate of Depressive Suicides in the Population,” Psychiatry
Research, 81 (1998): 233–240, P. S. F. Yip, A. Chao, and T. P. Ho, “A Re-
Examination of Seasonal Variation in Suicide in Australia and New
Zealand,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 47 (1998): 141–150; Z. Rihmer,
“Education of Primary Care Providers in the Reduction of Suicide Risk:
Does the Gotland Model Work in Hungary Too?” paper presented at
Treatment Research with Suicidal Patients Meeting, jointly sponsored by
the National Institute of Mental Health and the American Foundation for
Suicide Prevention, Washington, D.C., March 1999.
82 The explanations for this “deseasonalization”: J. Aschoff, “Annual
Rhythms in Man,” in J. Aschoff, ed., Handbook of Behavioral
Neurobiology, vol. 4: Biological Rhythms (New York: Plenum, 1981), pp.
475–487.
83 Emile Durkheim observed: Emile Durkheim, Suicide: A Study in
Sociology (New York: Free Press, 1951: first published 1897); L. I. Dublin
and B. Bunzel, To Be or Not to Be: A Study of Suicide (New York: Smith
and Hass, 1933); A. J. Flisher, C. D. H. Parry, D. Bradshaw, and J. M.
Juritz, “Seasonal Variation of Suicide in South Africa,” Psychiatry
Research, 66 (1997): 13–22.
84 far more pronounced: M. R. Eastwood, J. L. Whitton, P. M. Kramer, and
A. M. Peter, “Infradian Rhythm: A Comparison of Affective Disorders and
Normal Persons,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 42 (1985): 295–299; F.
K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison, Manic-Depressive Illness (New York:
Oxford, 1990).
85 plasma L-tryptophan: L. Wetterberg, D. Eriksson, Y. Friberg, and B.
Vango, “Melatonin in Humans: Physiological and Clinical Studies,” Clinica
Chimica Acta, 86 (1978): 169–177; T. H. Oddie, A. H. Klein, T. P. Foley,
and D. A. Fisher, “Variation in Values for Iodothyronine Hormones,
Thyrotropin, and Thyroxine-Binding Globulin in Normal Umbilical Cord
Serum with Season and Duration of Storage,” Clinical Chemistry, 25
(1979): 1251–1253; P. R. Perez, J. G. Lopez, I. P. Makeos, A. D. Escribano,
and M. L. S. Sanchez, “Seasonal Variations in Thyroid Hormones in
Plasma,” Revista Clínica Española, 156 (1980): 245–247; K. M. Behall, D.
J. Scholfield, J. G. Hallfrisch, J. L. Kelsay, and S. Reiser, “Seasonal
Variation in Plasma Glucose and Hormone Levels in Adult Men and
Women,” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 40 (1984): 1352–1356;
D. J. Gordon, D. C. Trost, J. Hyde, F. S. Whaley, P. J. Hannan, D. R.
Jacobs, and L.-G. Ekelund, “Seasonal Cholesterol Cycles: The Lipid

Research Clinics Coronary Primary Prevention Trial Placebo Group,”
Circulation, 76 (1987): 1224–1231; M. Maes, S. Scharpé, R. Verkerk, P.
D’Hondt, D. Peeters, P. Cosyns, P. Thompson, F. De Meyer, A. Wauters,
and H. Neels, “Seasonal Variation in Plasma l-Tryptophan Availability in
Healthy Volunteers: Relationship to Violent Suicide Occurrence,” Archives
of General Psychiatry, 52 (1995): 937–946.
86 The effect of seasonal changes: A. Carlsson, L. Svennerholm, and B.
Winblad, “Seasonal and Circadian Monoamine Variations in Human Brains
Examined Post Mortem,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 280 (1979): 75–
83; J. Aschoff, “Annual Rhythms in Man,” in J. Aschoff, ed., Handbook of
Behavioral Neurobiology; vol. 4: Biological Rhythms (New York: Plenum,
1981), pp. 475–487; M. F. Losonczy, R. C. Mohs, and K. L. Davis,
“Seasonal Variations of Human Lumbar CSF Neurotransmitter Metabolite
Concentrations,” Psychiatry Research, 12 (1984): 79–87; E. Souêtre, E.
Salvati, J. L. Belugou, P. Douillet, T. Braccini, and G. Darcourt, “Seasonal
Variation of Serotonin Function in Humans: Research and Clinical
Implications,” Annals of Clinical Psychiatry, 1 (1989): 153–164; V. Lacoste
and A. Wirz-Justice, “Seasonal Variation in Normal Subjects: An Update of
Variables Current in Depression Research,” in N. Rosenthal and M. Blehar,
eds., Seasonal Affective Disorders and Phototherapy (New York: Guilford
Press, 1989), pp. 167–229; M. J. Sarrias, F. Artigas, E. Martínez, and E.
Gelpí, “Seasonal Changes of Plasma Serotonin and Related Parameters:
Correlation with Environmental Measures,” Biological Psychiatry, 26
(1989): 695–706; I. Modai, R. Malmgren, L. Wetterberg, P. Eneroth, A.
Valevski, and M. Åsberg, “Blood Levels of Melatonin, Serotonin, Cortisol,
and Prolactin in Relation to the Circadian Rhythm of Platelet Serotonin
Uptake,” Psychiatry Research, 43 (1992): 161–166; D. S. Pine, P. D.
Trautman, D. Shaffer, L. Cohen, M. Davies, M. Stanley, and B. Parsons,
“Seasonal Rhythm of Platelet [3H] Imipramine Binding in Adolescents
Who Attempted Suicide,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 152 (1995):
923–925; R. J. Verkes, G. A. Kerkhof, E. Beld, M. W. Hengeveld, and G.
M. J. van Kempen, “Suicidality, Circadian Activity Rhythms and Platelet
Serotonergic Measures in Patients with Recurrent Suicidal Behaviour,”
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 93 (1996): 27–34; K. B. Zajicek, C. S.
Price, S. E. Shoaf, P. T. Mehlman, S. J. Suomi, M. Linnoila, and J. Dee
Higley, “Seasonal Variation in CSF 5-HIAA Concentrations in Male Rhesus
Macaques,” Neuropsychopharmacology, in press.
87 Hospital admissions for mania: P. Pinel, A Treatise on Insanity, trans. D.

D. Davis (New York: Hafner, 1806; first published, 1801); E. Esquirol, A
Treatise on Insanity, trans. E. K. Hunt (Philadelphia: Lea and Blanchard,
1845; first published 1838); D. H. Myers and P. Davies, “The Seasonal
Incidence of Mania and Its Relationship to Climate Variables,”
Psychological Medicine, 8 (1978): 433–440; A. C. Pande, “Light-Induced
Hypomania,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 142 (1985): 1146; T. A.
Wehr, D. A. Sack, and N. E. Rosenthal, “Sleep Reduction as a Final
Common Pathway in the Genesis of Mania,” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 144 (1987): 201–204; P. A. Carney, C. T. Fitzgerald, and C.
Monaghan, “Seasonal Variations in Mania,” in C. Thompson and T.
Silverstone, eds., Seasonal Affective Disorder (London: CNS, 1989), pp.
19–27; F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison, Manic-Depressive Illness (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1990); R. T. Mulder, J. P. Cosgriff, A. M.
Smith, and P. R. Joyce, “Seasonality of Mania in New Zealand,” Australian
and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 24 (1990): 187–190; H. K. Sayer,
S. Marshall, and G. W. Mellsop, “Mania and Seasonality in the Southern
Hemisphere,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 23 (1991): 151–156; N.
Takei, E. O’Callaghan, P. Sham, G. Glover, A. Tamura, and R. Murray,
“Seasonality of Admissions in the Psychoses: Effect of Diagnosis, Sex, and
Age at Onset,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 161 (1992): 506–511; K.
Kamo, S. Tomitaka, S. Nakadaira, T. Kno, and K. Sakamoto, “Season and
Mania,” Japanese Journal of Psychiatry and Neurology, 47 (1993): 473–
474; J. L. Pio-Abreu, “Seasonal Variation in Bipolar Disorder,” British
Journal of Psychiatry, 170 (1997): 483–484.
88 
Schizophrenia, 
likewise: 
E. 
Meier, 
“Die 
periodischen
Jahresschwankungen der internierung Geistes kranker in der Heilanstatt
Bürghölzli-Zürich 1900 bis 1920,” Zeitschrift für die Gesamte Neurologie
und Psychiatrie, 76 (1922): 479–507; K. Abe, “Seasonal Fluctuation of
Psychiatric Admissions, Based on the Data for Seven Prefectures of Japan
for a Seven-Year Period 1955–61, with a Review of the Literature,” Folia
Psychiatrica et Neurologica Japonica, 17 (1963): 101–112; E. H. Hare and
S. D. Walter, “Seasonal Variation in Admissions of Psychiatric Patients and
Its Relation to Seasonal Variation in Their Birth,” Journal of Epidemiology
and Community Health, 32 (1978), 47–52; M. R. Eastwood and A. M.
Peter, “Epidemiology and Seasonal Affective Disorder,” Psychological
Medicine, 18 (1988): 799–806; N. Takei, E. O’Callaghan, P. Sham, G.
Glover, A. Tamura, and R. Murray, “Seasonality of Admissions in the
Psychoses: Effect of Diagnosis, Sex, and Age at Onset,” British Journal of

Psychiatry, 161 (1992): 506–511; M. Clarke, P. Moran, F. Keogh, M.
Morris, A. Kinsella, D. Walsh, C. Larkin, and E. O’Callaghan, “Seasonal
Influences on Admissions in Schizophrenia and Affective Disorder in
Ireland,” Schizophrenia Research, 34 (1998): 143–149.
89 Depressive episodes: E. H. Hare and S. D. Walter, “Seasonal Variation in
Admissions of Psychiatric Patients and Its Relation to Seasonal Variation in
Their Births,” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 32 (1978):
47–52; E. Frangos, G. Athanassenas, S. Tsitourides, P. Psilolignos, A.
Robos, N. Katsanou, and C. Bulgaris, “Seasonality of the Episodes of
Recurrent Affective Psychoses: Possible Prophylactic Interventions,”
Journal of Affective Disorders, 2 (1980): 239–247; Z. Rihmer, “Season of
Birth and Season of Hospital Admission in Bipolar Depressed Female
Patients,” Psychiatry Research, 3 (1980): 247–251; G. Parker and S. Walter,
“Seasonal Variation in Depressive Disorders and Suicidal Deaths in New
South Wales,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 140 (1982): 626–632; T. D.
Brewerton and D. Mclaughlin, “Circannual Cyclicity of Affective Illnesses
in Hawaii,” paper presented at the Conference on Recent Advances in
Affective Disorders, 1986; M. R. Eastwood and A. M. Peter,
“Epidemiology and Seasonal Affective Disorder,” Psychological Medicine,
18 (1988): 799–806; F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison, Manic-Depressive
Illness (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990); M. Maes, P. Cosyns, H.
Y. Meltzer, F. DeMeyer, and D. Peeters, “Seasonality in Violent Suicide but
Not Nonviolent Suicide or Homicide,” American Journal of Psychiatry,
150 (1993): 1380–1385; T. Silverstone, S. Romans, N. Hunt, and H.
McPherson, “Is There a Seasonal Pattern of Relapse in Bipolar Affective
Disorders? A Dual Northern and Southern Hemisphere Cohort Study,”
British Journal of Psychiatry, 167 (1995): 58–60; C. P. Szabo and M. J.
Terre-Blanche, “Seasonal Variation in Mood Disorder Presentation: Further
Evidence of This Phenomenon in South African Sample,” Journal of
Affective Disorders, 33 (1995): 209–214; K. Suhail and R. Cochrane,
“Seasonal Variations in Hospital Admissions for Affective Disorders by
Gender and Ethnicity,” Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 33
(1998): 211–217.
90 Violent suicides: R. P. Michael and D. Zumpe, “Sexual Violence in the
United States and the Role of the Season,” American Journal of Psychiatry,
140 (1983): 883–886; R. A. Goodman, J. L. Herndon, G. R. Istre, F. B.
Jordan, and J. Kelaghan, “Fatal Injuries in Oklahoma: Descriptive
Epidemiology Using Medical Examiner Data,” Southern Medical Journal,

82 (1989): 1128–1134; G. Roitman, E. Orev, and G. Schreiber, “Annual
Rhythms of Violence in Hospitalized Affective Patients: Correlation with
Changes in the Duration of the Daily Photoperiod,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 82 (1990): 73–76; P. Linkowski, F. Martin, and V. De
Maertelaer, “Effect of Some Climatic Factors on Violent and Non-Violent
Suicides in Belgium,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 25 (1992): 161–166;
M. Maes, P. Cosyns, H. Y. Meltzer, F. De Meyer, and D. Peeters,
“Seasonality in Violent Suicide but Not in Nonviolent Suicide or
Homicide,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 150 (1993): 1380–1385; J.
Tiihonen, P. Räsänen, and H. Hakko, “Seasonal Varation in the Occurrence
of Homicide in Finland,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 154 (1997):
1711–1714; H. Hakko, P. Räsänen, and J. Tiihone, “Seasonal Variation in
Suicide Occurrence in Finland,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 98
(1998): 92–97; A. Preti and P. Miotto, “Seasonality in Suicides: The
Influence of Suicide Method, Gender and Age on Suicide Distribution in
Italy,” Psychiatry Research, 81 (1988): 219–231.
91 “But these things also are Spring’s”: Edward Thomas, “But These
Things Also,” in R. George Thomas, ed., The Collected Poems of Edward
Thomas (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1978), p. 127.
ESSAY • THE COLOURING TO EVENTS
1 “private concerns of the household.”: Letter from Thomas Jefferson to
Meriwether Lewis, February 23, 1801, in D. Jackson, ed., Letters of the
Lewis and Clark Expedition, with Related Documents: 1783–1854, 2d ed.
(Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1978), vol. 1, p. 2.
2 “The object of your mission”: Thomas Jefferson’s instructions to
Meriwether Lewis, June 20, 1803, in ibid., pp. 61–66.
3 “They embrace years of study”: D. Jackson, Thomas Jefferson and the
Stony Mountains: Exploring the West from Monticello (Urbana: University
of Illinois Pess, 1981), p. 139, quoted in Stephen Ambrose, Undaunted
Courage: Meriwether Lewis, Thomas Jefferson, and the Opening of the
American West (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996), p. 96.
4 “Capt. Lewis is brave”: Letter from Thomas Jefferson to Benjamin Rush,
February 28, 1803, in Jackson, Letters of the Lewis and Clark Expedition,
vol. 1, pp. 18–19.
5 After Lewis died: Thomas Jefferson, “Life of Captain Lewis,” August 18,

1813, in M. Lewis, The Lewis and Clark Expedition, the 1814 Edition
(Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott, 1961), vol. 1, pp. xvi, xviii–xix.
218 “Thursday, May 2nd”: From the journals of Meriwether Lewis and
William Clark, entries by Meriwether Lewis for May 2 and 3, 1805, in G.
E. Moulton and T. W. Dunlay, eds., The Journals of the Lewis and Clark
Expedition, vol. 4 (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1987), pp. 100–
104.
7 “Few explorers have undertaken”: R. D. Burroughs, “The Lewis and
Clark Expedition’s Botanical Discoveries,” Natural History, 75 (1966): 57–
62, p. 58. See also J. H. Beard, “The Medical Observations and Practice of
Lewis and Clark,” The Scientific Monthly, 20 (1925): 506–526; H. W.
Setzer, “Zoological Contributions of the Lewis and Clark Expedition,”
Journal of the Washington Academy of Sciences, 44 (1954): 356–357; D. W.
Will, “The Medical and Surgical Practice of the Lewis and Clark
Expedition,” Journal of the History of Medicine, 14 (1959): 273–297; P. R.
Cutright, Lewis and Clark: Pioneering Naturalists (Urbana: University of
Illinois Press, 1969); P. R. Cutright, “Contributions of Philadelphia to Lewis
and Clark History,” We Proceeded On, 6 (1982): 1–43.
8 “Never,” declared Thomas: Jefferson, “Life of Captain Lewis,” August
18, 1813, in Lewis, The Lewis and Clark Expedition, vol. 1, p. xxvi.
9 “I am very often applied”: Letter from Thomas Jefferson to Meriwether
Lewis, August 16, 1809, in Jackson, Letters of the Lewis and Clark
Expedition, vol. 2, p. 459.
10 “This day I completed”: Meriwether Lewis, journal, August 18, 1805, in
Moulton and Dunlay, The Journals of the Lewis and Clark Expedition, vol.
5, p. 118.
11 “Several of his Bills”: Letter from William Clark to Jonathan Clark,
September 1809, published in J. J. Holmberg,” ‘I Wish You to See & Know
All’: The Recently Discovered Letters of William Clark to Jonathan Clark,”
We Proceeded On, 18 (1992): 10.
12 unloaded Lewis’s boat: Letter from James Howe to Frederick Bates,
September 28, 1809, Missouri Historical Society Collections, 4 (1923):
474.
13 “In this condition”: Letter from Captain Gilbert C. Russell to Thomas
Jefferson, November 26, 1811, in Jackson, Letters of the Lewis and Clark
Expedition, vol. 2, pp. 573–574.
14 “It is with extreme pain”: Letter from James Neelly to Thomas Jefferson,

October 18, 1809, in Jackson, Letters of the Lewis and Clark Expedition,
vol. 2, pp. 467–468.
15 “Governor Lewis, she said”: Letter from Alexander Wilson to Alexander
Lawson, May 28, 1811, in E. Coues, ed., History of the Expedition Under
the Command of Lewis and Clark (New York: Dover Reprint, 1965; first
published 1893), vol. 1, pp. xliv–xlvi.
16 “I fear O!”: Letter from William Clark to Jonathan Clark, October 28,
1809, in Jackson, Letters of the Lewis and Clark Expedition, vol. 2, p. 727.
17 “Governor Lewis had”: Thomas Jefferson, “Life of Captain Lewis,”
August 18, 1813, in Lewis, The Lewis and Clark Expedition, vol. 1, pp.
xxvii–xxviii.
18 But others have felt differently: In addition to O. D. Wheeler, F. W.
Seymour, R. Dillon, C. Skinner, and A. Furtwangler, there have been many
others weighing in for either murder or suicide. Among these are D. A.
Phelps, “The Tragic Death of Meriweather Lewis,” William and Mary
Quarterly, 13 (1956): 305–318; V. Fisher, Suicide or Murder: The Strange
Death of Governor Meriwether Lewis (Chicago: Sage Books, 1962); P. R.
Cutright, “Rest, Rest, Perturbed Spirit,” We Proceeded On, 12 (1986): 7–16;
E. G. Chuinard, “How Did Meriwether Lewis Die? It Was Murder” (pt. 1),
We Proceeded On, 17 (1991): 4–11; E. G. Chuinard, “How Did Meriwether
Lewis Die? It Was Murder” (pt. 2), We Proceeded On, 18 (1991): 4–10.
19 “It seems impossible”: O. D. Wheeler, The Trial of Lewis and Clark,
1804–1904 (New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1904), p. 193.
20 “Many believed that Governor Lewis”: F. W. Seymour, Meriwether
Lewis (New York: D. Appleton–Century, 1937), pp. 237–238.
21 “Is it likely”: R. Dillon, Meriwether Lewis: A Biography (New York:
Coward-McCann, 1965), pp. 344, 350.
22 “beclouded”: “But, at least, the theory of suicide no longer beclouds his
name,” wrote C. Skinner in Adventures in Oregon (New Haven, 1920), p.
70.
23 “tainted by dishonor”: A. Furtwangler, Acts of Discovery: Visions of
America in the Lewis and Clark Journals (Urbana: University of Illinois
Press, 1993).
24 “It seems to me”: E. G. Chuinard, “How Did Meriwether Lewis Die? It
Was Murder” (pt. 3), We Proceeded On, 18 (1992): 4–10, p. 4.
25 “Thomas Jefferson’s complicity”: D. L. Chandler, The Jefferson

Conspiracies: A President’s Role in the Assassination of Meriwether Lewis
(New York: Morrow, 1994), pp. 325–326.
26 there may have been instability: S. M. Drumm, Luttig’s Journal of the
Fur Trading Expedition on the Upper Missouri, 1812–1813 (St. Louis:
Missouri Historical Society, 1920), pp. 150–151. Meriwether Lewis’s
mother, Lucy Meriwether Lewis, remarried after the death of Lewis’s
father. It is unclear whether the mental instability reported in Dr. John
Marks came from the Meriwether or Marks side of the family or both. If it
came from the Meriwether side and there was instability on the Lewis side
as well, it would not be at all surprising that Meriwether Lewis suffered
from a severe form of mental illness.
27 “He had, however, four times”: S. E. Ambrose, Undaunted Courage:
Meriwether Lewis, Thomas Jefferson, and the Opening of the American
West (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996), pp. 358, 481–482.
28 He may well have suffered: A. T. W. Forrester, “Malaria and Insanity,”
Lancet, 1 (1920): 16–17; W. K. Anderson, Malarial Psychoses and
Neuroses (London: Oxford University Press, 1927); C. C. Turner, “The
Neurologic and Psychiatric Manifestations of Malaria,” Southern Medical
Journal, 29 (1936): 578–586; D. H. Funkenstein, “Tertian Malaria and
Anxiety,” Psychosomatic Medicine, 11 (1949): 158–159; R. B. Daroff, J. J.
Deller, A. J. Kastl, and W. W. Blocker, “Cerebral Malaria,” Journal of the
American Medical Association, 202 (1967): 119–122; D. W. Mulder and A.
J. Dale, “Brain Syndromes Associated with Infection,” in A. M. Freedman
and H. I. Kaplan, eds., Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry (Baltimore:
Williams & Wilkins, 1967), pp. 775–786; W. W. Blocker, A. J. Kastl, and
R. B. Daroff, “The Psychiatric Manifestations of Cerebral Malaria,”
American Journal of Psychiatry, 125 (1968): 192–196; A. J. Kastl, R. B.
Daroff, and W. W. Blocker, “Psychological Testing of Cerebral Malaria
Patients,” Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 147 (1968): 553–561; R.
M. Wintrob, “Malaria and the Acute Psychotic Episode,” Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 156 (1973): 306–317; P. D. Marsden and L. J.
Bruce-Chwatt, “Cerebral Malaria,” in R. W. Hornabrook, ed., Topics on
Tropical Neurology (Philadelphia: F. A. Davis, 1975); D. A. Warrell,
“Cerebral Malaria,” in R. A. Shakir, P. K. Newman, and C. M. Poser, eds.,
Tropical Neurology (London: W. B. Saunders, 1996), pp. 213–245.
29 Douglass Adair and Dawson Phelps: Quoted in V. Fisher, Suicide or
Murder: The Strange Death of Governor Meriwether Lewis (Chicago: Sage
Books, 1962), p. 231.

30 One reader of the Washington Post: E. Foxwell, letter to the editor,
Washington Post, June 29, 1996; K. R. Jamison, letter to the editor,
Washington Post, July 6, 1996.
31 “He was a man of high energy”: Ambrose, Undaunted Courage, p. 482.
32 “The breaking of so great a thing”: William Shakespeare, Antony and
Cleopatra, Act V, sc. i, ll. 13–16 (London: J. M. Dent, The Temple
Shakespeare, 1896), p. 146.
8 • MODEST MAGICAL QUALITIES
1 “For melancholy”: Robert Burton, The Anatomy of Melancholy, vol. 2.
Robert Burton’s (1577–1640) Anatomy of Melancholy was first published in
1621 and remains to this day one of the most important books on the
subject. In it, the author acknowledged that he himself suffered from
melancholy; it is reported by others that his mother’s brother “died of
melancholy.” When Burton died in 1640, several of the students at Oxford
whispered among themselves that he had “sent up his soul to heaven thro’ a
slip about his neck.” Another Oxford contemporary concurred, stating that
Burton had “ended his dayes in that chamber by hinging him selfe.”
Whatever the truth of the rumors—and those arguing against suicide point
out that Burton would not have been allowed the Christian burial he
received had there been definitive evidence that he had killed himself—the
epitaph he wrote for his tombstone is provocative: “To whom Melancholy
gave life and death.” Michael O’Connell, Robert Burton (Boston: Twayne
Publishers, 1986), pp. 31–33; see also Lawrence Babb, Sanity in Bedlam: A
Study of Robert Burton’s Anatomy of Melancholy (East Lansing: Michigan
State University Press, 1959); Bergen Evans, in consultation with George J.
Mohr, The Psychiatry of Robert Burton (New York: Octagon Books, 1972);
Ruth A. Fox, The Tangled Chain: The Structure of Disorder in The
Anatomy of Melancholy (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1976).
2 “much approved against melancholy”: Robert Burton, The Anatomy of
Melancholy, vol. 2, Pt. 2, Sec. 5 (London: J. M. Dent, 1961; first published
1621), pp. 248–251.
3 communicate their intentions: E. S. Shneidman and N. L. Farberow, “The
Logic of Suicide,” in E. S. Shneidman and N. L. Farberow, eds., Clues to
Suicide (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1957); E. Robins, S. Gassner, J. Kayes,
R. H. Wilkinson, and G. E. Murphy, “The Communication of Suicidal

Intent: A Study of 134 Consecutive Cases of Successful (Completed)
Suicide,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 115 (1959): 724–733; T. L.
Dorpat and H. S. Ripley, “A Study of Suicide in the Seattle Area,”
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 1 (1960): 349–359; P. G. Yessler, J. J. Gibbs,
and H. A. Becker, “On the Communication of Suicidal Ideas: I. Some
Sociological and Behavioral Considerations,” Archives of General
Psychiatry, 3 (1960): 612–631; K. E. Rudestam, “Stockholm and Los
Angeles: A Cross-Cultural Study of the Communication of Suicidal Intent,”
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 36 (1971): 82–90; B. M.
Barraclough, J. Bunch, B. Nelson, and P. Sainsbury, “A Hundred Cases of
Suicide: Clinical Aspects,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 125 (1974): 355–
373; J. Beskow, “Suicide and Mental Disorder in Swedish Men,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 277 (Suppl.) (1979): 1–138; C. L. Rich, R. C.
Fowler, L. A. Fogarty, and D. Young, “San Diego Suicide Study: III.
Relationships Between Diagnoses and Stressors,” Archives of General
Psychiatry, 45 (1988): 589–594; E. T. Isometsä, M. M. Henriksson, H. M.
Aro, M. E. Heikkinen, K. I. Kuoppasalmi, and J. K. Lönnqvist, “Suicide in
Major Depression,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 151 (1994): 530–536;
E. T. Isometsä, M. M. Henriksson, H. M. Aro, and J. K. Lönnqvist, “Suicide
in Bipolar Disorder in Finland,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 151
(1994): 1020–1024.
4 “If we had found that suicide”: E. Robins, G. E. Murphy, R. H.
Wilkinson, S. Gassner, and J. Kayes, “Some Clinical Considerations in the
Prevention of Suicide Based on a Study of 134 Successful Suicides,”
American Journal of Public Health, 49 (1959): 888–899, p. 897.
5 severe anxiety, agitation, or perturbance: E. S. Shneidman and N. L.
Farberow, eds., Clues to Suicide (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1957); J.
Fawcett, K. A. Busch, D. Jacobs, H. M. Kravitz, and L. Fogg, “Suicide: A
Four-Pathway Clinical-Biochemical Model,” Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 836 (1997): 288–301.
6 “Many psychiatrists”: W. Styron, Darkness Visible: A Memoir of Madness
(New York: Random House, 1990), pp. 68–69.
7 its putative capacity: M. H. Sheard, J. L. Marini, and C. I. Bridges, “The
Effect of Lithium on Impulsive Aggressive Behavior in Man,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 133 (1976): 1409–1416; E. A. Wickam and F. V.
Reed, “Lithium for the Control of Aggressive and Self-Mutilating
Behavior,” International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 2 (1977): 181–190;
A. J. Mandell and S. Knapp, “Asymmetry and Mood, Emergent Properties

of Serotonin Regulation,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 36 (1979): 909–
916; S. L. Treiser, C. S. Cascio, T. L. O’Donohue, et al., “Lithium Increases
Serotonin 
Release 
and 
Decreases 
Serotonin 
Receptors 
in 
the
Hippocampus,” Science, 213 (1981): 1529–1531; F. N. Johnson, ed., The
Psychopharmacology of Lithium (London: Macmillan, 1984); M. H.
Sheard, “Clinical Pharmacology of Aggressive Behavior,” Clinical
Neuropharmacology, 11 (1988): 483–492; L. H. D. S. Price, P. L. Charney,
P. L. Delgado, and G. R. Heninger, “Lithium and Serotonin Function:
Implications 
for 
the 
Serotonin 
Hypothesis 
of 
Depression,”
Psychopharmacology, 100 (1990): 3–12; H. K. Lee, T. B. Reddy, S. Travin,
and H. Bluestone, “A Trial of Lithium Citrate for the Management of Acute
Agitation of Psychiatric Inpatients: A Pilot Study,” Journal of Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 12 (1992): 361–362; J. F. Dixon and L. E. Hokin,
“Lithium Acutely Inhibits and Chronically Up-Regulates and Stabilizes
Glutamate Uptake by Presynaptic Nerve Endings in Mouse Cerebral
Cortex,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 95 (1998):
8363–8368; P. E. Harrison-Read, “Lithium Withdrawal Mania Supports
Lithium’s Antimanic Action and Suggests an Animal Model Involving
Serotonin,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 172 (1998): 96–97.
8 decrease aggression, agitation: R. W. Cowdry and D. L. Gardner,
“Pharmacotherapy of Borderline Personality Disorder,” Archives of General
Psychiatry, 45 (1988): 111–119; T. Kastner, R. Finesmith, and K. Walsh,
“Long-Term Administration of Valproic Acid in the Treatment of Affective
Symptoms in People with Mental Retardation,” Journal of Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 13 (1993): 448–451; C. L. Bowden, A. M. Brugger,
A. C. Swann, J. R. Calabrese, P. G. Janicak, F. Petty, S. D. Dilsaver, J. M.
Davis, A. J. Rush, J. G. Small, E. S. Garza-Trevino, S. C. Risch, P. J.
Goodnick, and D. D. Morris, “Efficacy of Divalproex vs. Lithium and
Placebo in the Treatment of Mania,” Journal of the American Medical
Association, 271 (1994): 918–924; M. Horne and S. E. Lindley,
“Divalproex Sodium in the Treatment of Aggressive Behavior and
Dysphoria in Patients with Organic Brain Syndromes,” Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 56 (1995): 430–431; E. M. Zayas and G. T. Grossberg,
“Treating the Agitated Alzheimer Patient,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
57 (Suppl. 7) (1996): 46–51; D. L. Fogelson and H. Sternbach,
“Lamotrigine Treatment of Refractory Biploar Disorder,” Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 58 (1997): 271–273; S. L. McElroy, C. A. Soutullo, P.
E. Keck, and G. F. Kmetz, “A Pilot Trial of Adjunctive Gabapentin in the

Treatment of Bipolar Disorder,” Annals of Clinical Psychiatry, 9 (1997):
99–103; R. S. Ryback, L. Brodsky, and F. Munasifi, “Gabapentin in Bipolar
Disorder,” Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 9 (1997):
301; C. B. Schaffer and L. C. Schaffer, “Gabapentin in the Treatment of
Bipolar Disorder,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 154 (1997): 291–292;
J. Sporn and G. Sachs, “The Anticonvulsant Lamotrigine in Treatment-
Resistant 
Manic-Depressive 
Illness,” 
Journal 
of 
Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 17 (1997): 185–189.
9 Patients who had not been treated with lithium: L. Tondo, K. R. Jamison,
and R. J. Baldessarini, “Effect of Lithium Maintenance on Suicidal
Behavior in Major Mood Disorders,” Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 836 (1997): 339–351.
10 Tondo and his colleagues: L. Tondo, R. J. Baldessarini, G. Floris, F.
Silvetti, and N. Rudas, “Lithium Maintenance Treatment Reduces Risk of
Suicidal Behavior in Bipolar Disorder Patients,” in V. S. Gallicchio and N.
J. Birch, eds., Lithium Biochemical and Clinical Advances (Cheshire,
Conn.: Weidner Publishing Group, 1996), pp. 161–171. See also R. J.
Baldessarini, L. Tondo, G. Floris, and N. Rudas, “Reduced Morbidity After
Gradually Discontinuing Lithium in Bipolar I and II Disorders: A
Replication Study,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 154 (1997): 548–550;
R. J. Baldessarini, L. Tondo, and J. Hennen, “Effects of Lithium Treatment
and Its Discontinuation on Suicidal Behavior in Bipolar Manic-Depressive
Disorders,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60 (Suppl. 2) (1999): 77–84.
11 A 1999 study from Sweden: A. Nilsson, “Lithium Therapy and Suicide
Risk,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60 (Suppl. 2) (1999): 85–88; B.
Ahrens, B. Müller-Oerlinghausen, and P. Grof, “Length of Lithium
Treatment Needed to Eliminate the High Mortality of Affective Disorders,”
British Journal of Psychiatry, 163 (Suppl. 21) (1993): 27–29.
12 “Psychiatrists and other practitioners”: N. J. Birch and D. P. Srinivasan,
“Prevention of Suicide,” Lancet, 340 (1992): 1233; R. Colgate, “Ranking of
Therapeutic and Toxic Side-Effects of Lithium Carbonate,” Psychiatric
Bulletin, 16 (1992): 473–475.
13 to prevent suicide is unproven: F. K. Goodwin, “Anticonvulsant Therapy
and Suicide Risk in Affective Disorders,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
60 (Suppl. 2) (1999): 89–93.
14 “antisuicidal effects”: K. Thies-Flechtner, B. Müller-Oerlinghausen, W.
Seibert, A. Walther, and W. Greil, “Effect of Prophylactic Treatment on

Suicide Risk in Patients with Major Affective Disorders: Data from a
Randomized Prospective Trial,” Pharmacopsychiatry 29 (1996): 103–107,
p. 106; B. Müller-Oerlinghausen, B. Ahrens, and A. Berghoefer,
“Arguments for a Specific Antisuicidal Effect of Lithium,” paper presented
at the International Society for Lithium Research, Lexington, Ky., May
1999.
15 “Discontinuing lithium”: B. Müller-Oerlinghausen, cited in M. J.
Friedrich, “Lithium: Proving Its Mettle for 50 Years,” Journal of the
American Medical Association, 281 (1999): 2271–2273.
16 Sources for graph: D. H. Myers and C. D. Neal, “Suicide in Psychiatric
Patients,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 133 (1978): 38–44; S. W. Gale, A.
Mesnikoff, J. Fine, and J. A. Talbot, “A Study of Suicide in State Mental
Hospitals in New York City,” Psychiatric Quarterly, 52 (1980): 201–213; J.
Modestin, “Antidepressive Therapy in Depressed Clinical Studies,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 71 (1985): 111–116; Z. Rihmer, J. Barsi, M.
Arató, and E. Demeter, “Suicide in Subtypes of Primary Major
Depression,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 18 (1990): 221–225; G.
Isacsson, U. Bergman, and C. L. Rich, “Antidepressants, Depression and
Suicide: An Analysis of the San Diego Study,” Journal of Affective
Disorders, 32 (1994): 277–286; E. T. Isometsä, M. M. Henriksson, H. M.
Aro, M. E. Heikkinen, K. I. Kuoppasalmi, and J. K. Lönnqvist, “Suicide in
Major Depression,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 151 (1994): 530–536;
C. L. Rich and G. Isacsson, “Suicide and Antidepressants in South
Alabama: Evidence for Improved Treatment of Depression,” Journal of
Affective Disorders, 45 (1997): 135–142.
17 are almost always excluded: C. M. Beasley, B. E. Dornsief, J. C.
Bottomsworth, M. E. Sayler, A. H. Rampey, J. H. Heiligenstein, V. L.
Thompson, D. J. Murphy, and D. N. Masica, “Fluoxetine and Suicide: A
Meta-Analysis of Controlled Trials of Treatment for Depression,” British
Medical Journal, 303 (1991): 685–692.
18 decrease angry, aggressive, and impulsive behaviors, C. Salzman, A. N.
Wolfson, A. Schatzberg, J. Looper, R. Henke, M. Albanese, J. Swartz, and
E. Miyawaki, “Effect of Fluoxetine on Anger in Symptomatic Volunteers
with 
Borderline 
Personality 
Disorder,” 
Journal 
of 
Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 15 (1995): 23–29; E. F. Coccaro and R. J. Kavoussi,
“Fluoxetine and Impulsive Aggressive Behavior in Personality-Disordered
Subjects,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 54 (1997): 1081–1088.

19 a decrease in the number: S. A. Montgomery, D. L. Dunner, and G. C.
Dunbar, “Reduction of Suicidal Thoughts with Paroxetine and Comparison
with 
Reference 
Antidepressants 
and 
Placebo,” 
European
Neuropsychopharmacology, 5 (1995): 5–13; G. Isacsson, U. Bergman, and
C. L. Rich, “Epidemiological Data Suggest Antidepressants Reduce Suicide
Risk Among Depressives,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 41 (1996): 1–8;
A. Ohberg, E. Vuori, T. Klaukka, and J. Lonnqvist, “Antidepressants and
Suicide Mortality,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 50 (1998): 225–233; R.
J. Verkes, R. C. Van der Mast, M. W. Hengeveld, J. P. Tuyl, A. H.
Zwinderman, and G. M. J. Van Kempen, “Reduction by Paroxetine of
Suicidal Behavior in Patients with Repeated Suicide Attempts but Not
Major Depression,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 155 (1998): 543–547;
B. Müller-Oerlinghausen and A. Berghöfer, “Antidepressants and Suicidal
Risk,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60 (Suppl. 2) (1999): 94–99.
20 woefully underprescribe: B. M. Barraclough, J. Bunch, B. Nelson, and P.
Sainsbury, “A Hundred Cases of Suicide: Clinical Aspects,” British Journal
of Psychiatry, 125 (1974): 355–373; P. Tyrer, “Drug Treatment of
Psychiatric Patients in General Practice,” British Medical Journal, 2
(1978): 1008–1010; M. G. Keller, G. L. Klerman, P. W. Lavori, J. Fawcett,
W. Coryell, and J. Endicott, “Treatment Received by Depressed Patients,”
Journal of the American Medical Association, 248 (1982): 1848–1855; P.
K. Bridges, “And a Small Dose of an Antidepressant Might Help,” British
Journal of Psychiatry, 142 (1983): 626–628; L. F. Prescott and M. S.
Highley, “Drugs Prescribed for Self Poisoners” British Medical Journal,
290 (1985): 1633–1636; G. Isacsson, G. Boëthius, and U. Bergman, “Low
Level of Antidepressant Prescription for People Who Later Commit
Suicide: 15 Years of Experience from a Population-Based Drug Database in
Sweden,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 85 (1992): 444–448; E.
Isometsä, M. Henriksson, and J. Lönnqvist, “Completed Suicide and Recent
Lithium Treatment,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 26 (1992): 101–104; J.
Modestin and F. Schwarzenbach, “Effect of Psychopharmacotherapy on
Suicide Risk in Discharged Psychiatric Inpatients,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 85 (1992): 173–175; E. T. Isometsä, M. M. Henriksson, H.
M. Aro, and J. K. Lönnqvist, “Suicide in Bipolar Disorder in Finland,”
American Journal of Psychiatry, 15 (1994): 1020–1024; P. M. Marzuk, K.
Tardiff, A. C. Leon, C. S. Hirsch, M. Stajic, N. Hartwell, and L. Portera,
“Use of Prescription Psychotropic Drugs Among Suicide Victims in New
York City,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 152 (1995): 1520–1522; S.

Henriksson, G. Boëthius, and G. Isacsson, “The Prescription of Drugs to
Suicide Cases in a Swedish County, Jämtland, from 1985 Through 1995,”
data presented to the Annual Meeting of the American Association of
Suicidology, Bethesda, Md., April 1998; K. Rost, M. Zhang, J. Fortney, J.
Smith, J. Coyne, and G. R. Smith, “Persistently Poor Outcomes of
Undetected Major Depression in Primary Care,” General Hospital
Psychiatry, 20 (1998): 12–20; K. H. Suominen, E. T. Isometsä, M. M.
Henriksson, A. I. Ostamo, and J. K. Lönnqvist, “Inadequate Treatment for
Major Depression Both Before and After Attempted Suicide,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 155 (1998): 1778–1780; G. Isacsson, P. Holmgren,
H. Druid, and U. Bergman, “Psychotropics and Suicide Prevention:
Implications from Toxicological Screening of 5281 Suicides in Sweden
1992–1994,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 174 (1999): 259–265; M. A.
Oquendo, K. M. Malone, S. P. Ellis, H. A. Sackeim, and J. J. Mann,
“Inadequacy of Antidepressant Treatment for Patients with Major
Depression Who Are at Risk for Suicidal Behavior,” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 156 (1999): 190–194.
21 a high rate of suicide: This is reviewed in F. K. Goodwin and K. R.
Jamison, Manic-Depressive Illness (New York: Oxford University Press,
1990); see also Z. Rihmer, J. Barsi, M. Arató, and E. Demeter, “Suicide in
Subtypes of Primary Major Depression,” Journal of Affective Disorders, 18
(1990); 221–225.
22 perhaps one-third of patients: S. N. Ghaemi, E. E. Boiman, and F. K.
Goodwin, “Bipolar Disorder and Antidepressants: A Diagnostic and
Treatment Study,” paper presented at the American Psychiatric Association
Meeting, Toronto, May 1998.
23 survey of pediatricians: This was a survey investigation headed by Jerry
Rushton, a pediatrician at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
The results were presented at the Pediatrics Academic Societies Annual
Conference in San Francisco in May 1999 and summarized in the Journal
of the American Medical Association, 281 (1999): 1882.
24 overlapping symptoms: J. Biederman, S. V. Faraone, E. Mick, J.
Wozniack, L. Chen, C. Ouellette, A. Marrs, P. Moore, J. Garcia, D. Mennin,
and E. Lelon, “Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Juvenile
Mania: An Overlooked Comorbidity?” Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 35 (1996): 997–1008; J. Biederman, R.
Russell, J. Soriano, J. Wozniak, and S. V. Faraone, “Clinical Features of
Children with Both ADHD and Mania: Does Ascertainment Source Make a

Difference?” Journal of Affective Disorders, 51 (1998): 101–112; G. A.
Carlson, “Mania and ADHD: Comorbidity or Confusion,” Journal of
Affective Disorders, 51 (1998): 177–187; B. Geller, M. Williams, B.
Zimerman, J. Frazier, L. Beringer, and K. L. Warner, “Prepubertal and Early
Adolescent Bipolarity Differentiate from ADHD by Manic Symptoms,
Grandiose Delusions, Ultra-Rapid or Ultradian Cycling,” Journal of
Affective Disorders, 51 (1998): 81–91.
25 Their pre-illness: D. Quackenbush, S. Kutcher, H. Robertson, C. Boulos,
and P. Chaban, “Premorbid and Postmorbid School Functioning in Bipolar
Adolescents: Description and Suggested Academic Interventions,”
Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 41 (1996): 16–22; S. Kutcher, H. A.
Robertson, and D. Bird, “Premorbid Functioning in Adolescent Onset
Bipolar I Disorder: A Preliminary Report from an Ongoing Study,” Journal
of Affective Disorders, 51 (1998): 137–144.
26 controversial and unresolved: F. Rouillon, R. Phillips, E. Serrurier, E.
Ansart, and M. J. Gerard, “Prophylactic Efficacy of Maprotiline on
Relapses of Unipolar Depression.” L ‘Encéphale, 15 (1989): 527–534; M.
H. Teicher, C. Glod, and J. O. Cole, “Emergence of Intense Suicidal
Preoccupation During Fluoxetine Treatment,” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 147 (1990): 207–210; A. C. Power and P. J. Cowen,
“Fluoxetine and Suicidal Behaviour: Some Clinical and Theoretical Aspects
of a Controversy,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 161 (1992): 735–741; M.
H. Teicher, C. A. Glod, and J. O. Cole, “Antidepressant Drugs and the
Emergence of Suicidal Tendencies,” Drug Safety, 8 (1993): 186–212; D.
Healy, “The Fluoxetine and Suicide Controversy: A Review of the
Evidence,” CNS Drugs, 1 (1994): 223–231.
27 antidepressants do not increase: S. A. Montgomery and R. M. Pinder,
“Do Some Antidepressants Promote Suicide?” Psychopharmacology, 92
(1987): 265–266; C. M. Beasley, B. E. Dornseif, J. C. Bosomworth, M. E.
Sayler, A. H. Rampey, J. H. Heiligenstein, V. L. Thompson, D. J. Murphy,
and D. N. Masica, “Fluoxetine and Suicide: A Meta-Analysis of Controlled
Trials of Treatment for Depression,” British Medical Journal, 303 (1991):
685–692; P. N. Jenner, “Paroxetine: An Overview of Dosage, Tolerability,
and Safety,” International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 6 (Suppl. 4)
(1992): 69–80; G. D. Tollefson, J. Fawcett, G. Winokur, C. M. Beasley, J.
H. Potvin, D. E. Faries, A. H. Rampey, and M. E. Sayler, “Evaluation of
Suicidality During Pharmacologic Treatment of Mood and Nonmood
Disorders,” Annals of Clinical Psychiatry, 5 (1993): 209–224; S. Kasper, S.

Schindler, and A. Neumeister, “Risk of Suicide in Depression and Its
Implication for Psychopharmacological Treatment,” International Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 11 (1996): 71–79; J. F. Wernicke, M. E. Sayler, S. C.
Koke, D. K. Pearson, and G. D. Tollefson, “Fluoxetine and Concomitant
Centrally Acting Medication Use During Clinical Trials of Depression: The
Absence of an Effect Related to Agitation and Suicidal Behavior,”
Depression and Anxiety, 6 (1997): 31–39; A. C. Leon, M. B. Keller, M. G.
Warshaw, T. I. Mueller, D. A. Solomon, W. Coryell, and J. Endicott,
“Prospective Study of Fluoxetine Treatment and Suicidal Behavior in
Affectively Ill Subjects,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 156 (1999): 195–
201.
28 “possibility of a suicide attempt”: Physicians’ Desk Reference
(Montvale, N.J.: Medical Economics Company, 1996), p. 921.
29 The newer SSRIs: H.-J. Möller and E. M. Steinmeyer, “Are Serotonergic
Reuptake Inhibitors More Potent in Reducing Suicidality?: An Empircal
Study on Paroxetine,” European Neuropsychopharmacology, 4 (1994): 55–
59; D. C. Steffens, K. R. R. Krishnan, and M. J. Helms, “Are SSRIs Better
than TCAs? Comparison of SSRIs and TCAs: A Meta-Analysis,”
Depression and Anxiety, 6 (1997): 10–18; O. Benkert, M. Burkart, and H.
Wetzel, “Existing Therapies with Newer Antidepressants—Their Strengths
and Weaknesses,” in M. Briley and S. A. Montgomery, eds., Antidepressant
Therapy at the Dawn of the Third Millennium (St. Louis: Mosby, 1998), pp.
213–230; B. Müller-Oerlinghausen and A. Berghöfer, “Antidepressants and
Suicidal Risk,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60 (Suppl. 2) (1999): 94–99;
Treatment of Depression—Newer Pharmacotherapies, HCPR Publication
No. 99-E014 (Rockville, Md.: Agency for Health Care Policy and
Research, 1999).
30 used to good effect: J. R. Cornelius, I. M. Salloum, M. D. Cornelius, J.
M. Perel, M. E. Thase, J. G. Ehler, and J. J. Mann, “Fluoxetine Trial in
Suicidal Depressed Alcoholics,” Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 29 (1993):
195–199; J. R. Cornelius, I. M. Salloum, J. G. Ehler, P. J. Jarrett, M. D.
Cornelius, J. M. Perel, M. E. Thase, and A. Black, “Fluoxetine in
Depressed Alcoholics: A Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial,”
Archives of General Psychiatry, 54 (1997): 700–705; I. M. Salloum, J. R.
Cornelius, M. E. Thase, D. C. Daley, L. Kirisci, and C. Spotts, “Naltrexone
Utility in Depressed Alcoholics,” Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 34 (1998):
111–115.
31 in British women: D. Gunnell, H. Wehner, and S. Frankel, “Sex

Differences in Suicide Trends in England and Wales,” Lancet, 353 (1999):
556–557.
32 “Substance P”: M. S. Kramer, N. Cutler, J. Feighner, R. Shrivastava, J.
Carman, J. J. Sramek, S. A. Reines, G. Liu, D. Snavely, E. Wyatt-Knowles,
J. J. Hale, S. G. Mills, M. MacCoss, C. J. Swain, T. Harrison, R. G. Hill, F.
Hefti, E. M. Scolnick, M. A. Cascieri, G. G. Chicchi, S. Sadowski, A. R.
Williams, L. Hewson, D. Smith, E. J. Carlson, R. J. Hargreaves, and N. M.
J. Rupniak, “Distinct Mechanism for Antidepressant Activity by Blockade
of Central Substance P Receptors,” Science, 281 (1998): 1640–1644.
33 Omega-3 fatty acids: A. L. Stoll, E. Severus, M. P. Freeman, S. Rueter,
H. A. Zboyan, E. Diamond, K. K. Cress, and L. B. Marangell, “Omega-3
Fatty Acids in Bipolar Disorder: A Double-Blind Placebo-Conrolled Trial,”
Archives of General Psychiatry, 56 (1999): 407–412.
34 A seventeen-year epidemiological study: T. Hirayama, Life-Style and
Mortality: A Large Census-Based Cohort Study in Japan (Basel: Karger,
1990).
35 there have been reports: N. Praschak-Rieder, A. Neumeister, B.
Hesselmann, M. Willeit, C. Barnas, and S. Kasper, “Suicidal Tendencies as
a Complication of Light Therapy for Seasonal Affective Disorder: A Report
of Three Cases,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 58 (1997): 389–392; Y.
Meesters and C. A. J. van Houwelinger, “Rapid Mood Swings After
Unmonitored Light Exposure,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 155
(1998): 306; A. M. O’Breasail and S. Argouarch, “Hypomania and St.
John’s Wort,” Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 43 (1998): 746–747. For an
excellent overview of St. John’s wort, see N. Rosenthal, St. John’s Wort
(New York: HarperCollins, 1998).
36 they can cause akathisia: R. DeAlarcon and M. W. P. Carney, “Severe
Depressive Mood Changes Following Slow-Release Intramuscular
Fluphenazine Injection,” British Medical Journal, 3 (1969): 564–567; D. E.
Raskin, “Akathisia: A Side-Effect to Be Remembered,” American Journal
of Psychiatry, 129 (1972): 121–123; K. Shear, A. Frances, and P. Weiden,
“Suicide Associated with Akathisia and Depot Fluphenazine Treatment,”
Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 3 (1983): 235–236; R. E. Drake
and J. Ehrlich, “Suicide Attempts Associated with Akathisia,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 142 (1985): 499–501; R. E. Drake, S. J. Bartels, and
W. C. Torrey, “Suicide in Schizophrenia: Clinical Approaches,” in R.
Williams and J. T. Dalby, eds., Depression in Schizophrenics (New York:

Plenum Press, 1989), pp. 171–183; P. Sachdev, Akathisia and Restless Legs
(Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1995).
37 But used carefully: H. Warnes, “Suicide in Schizophrenics,” Diseases of
the Nervous System, 29 (Suppl. 5) (1968): 35–40; D. A. W. Johnson, G.
Pasterski, J. M. Ludlow, K. Street, and R. D. W. Taylor, “The
Discontinuance of Maintenance Neuroleptic Therapy in Chronic
Schizophrenic Patients: Drug and Social Consequences,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 67 (1983): 339–352; T. J. Taiminen, “Effect of
Psychopharmacotherapy on Suicide Risk in Psychiatric Inpatients,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 87 (1993): 45–47; H. Y. Meltzer and G. Okayli,
“Reduction of Suicidality During Clozapine Treatment of Neuroleptic-
Resistant Schizophrenia: Impact on Risk-Benefit Assessment,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 152 (1995): 183–190; T. P. Hogan and A. G. Awad,
“Pharmacotherapy and Suicide Risk in Schizophrenia,” Canadian Journal
of Psychiatry, 28 (1983): 277–281; A. M. Walker, L. L. Lanza, F. Arellano,
and K. J. Rothman, “Mortality in Current and Former Users of Clozapine,”
Epidemiology, 8 (1997): 671–677; D. D. Palmer, I. D. Henter, and R. J.
Wyatt, “Do Antipsychotic Medications Decrease the Risk of Suicide in
Patients with Schizophrenia?” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60 (suppl. 2)
(1999): 100–103.
38 Electroconvulsive therapy: M. T. Tsuang, G. M. Dempsey, and J. A.
Fleming, “Can ECT Prevent Premature Death and Suicide in
‘Schizoaffective’ Patients?” Journal of Affective Disorders, 1 (1979): 167–
171; B. L. Tanney, “Electroconvulsive Therapy and Suicide,” Suicide and
Life-Threatening Behavior, 16 (1986): 199–222; D. W. Black, G. Winokur,
E. Mohandoss, R. F. Woolson, and A. Nasrallah, “Does Treatment Influence
Mortality in Depressives? A Follow-up of 1076 Patients with Major
Affective Disorders,” Annals of Clinical Psychiatry, 1 (1989): 165–173;
American Psychiatric Association Task Force on ECT, The Practice of
ECT: Recommendations for Treatment, Training and Privileging
(Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Press, 1990); E. T. Isometsä, M.
M. Henriksson, M. E. Heikkinen, et al., “Completed Suicide and Recent
Electroconvulsive Therapy in Finland,” Convulsive Therapy, 12 (1996):
152–155; J. Prudic and H. A. Sackeim, “Electroconvulsive Therapy and
Suicide Risk,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60 (Suppl. 2) (1999): 104–
110.
39 “The narcissistic ponderings”: J. M. Himmelhoch, “Lest Treatment Abet
Suicide,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 48 (1987): 44–54.

40 A new, noninvasive: M. S. George, E. M. Wassermann, W. A. Williams,
A. Callahan, T. A. Ketter, P. Basser, M. Hallett, and R. M. Post, “Daily
Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS) Improves Mood in
Depression,” Neuroreport, 6 (1995): 1853–1856; A. Pascual-Leone, B.
Rubio, F. Pallardo, and M. D. Catala, “Beneficial Effect of Rapid-Rate
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation of the Left Dorsolateral Prefrontal
Cortex in Drug-Resistant Depression,” Lancet, 348 (1996): 233–237; R. H.
Belmaker, N. Grisaru, D. Ben-Sharar, and E. Klein, “The Effects of TMS
on Animal Modes of Depression, Beta-Adrenergic Receptors and Brain
Monoamines,” CNS Spectrums: International Journal of Neuropsychiatric
Medicine, 2 (1997): 26–30; M. S. George, E. M. Wassermann, T. A.
Kimbrell, J. J. Little, W. E. Williams, A. L. Danielson, B. D. Greenberg, M.
Hallett, and R. M. Post, “Mood Improvement Following Daily Left
Prefrontal Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation in Patients with
Depression: A Placebo-Controlled Crossover Trial,” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 154 (1997): 1752–1756; M. S. George, S. H. Lisanby, and H. A.
Sackiem, 
“Transcranial 
Magnetic 
Stimulation: 
Applications 
in
Neuropsychiatry,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 56 (1999); 300–311.
41 series of studies: G. L. Klerman, A. De Mascio, M. M. Weissman, B. A.
Prusoff, and E. S. Paykel, “Treatment of Depression by Drugs and
Psychotherapy,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 131 (1974): 186–191; A.
S. Friedman, “Interaction of Drug Therapy with Marital Therapy in
Depressed Patients,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 32 (1975): 619–637;
M. M. Weissman, “The Psychological Treatment of Depression: Evidence
for the Efficacy of Psychotherapy Alone, in Comparison with, and in
Combination with Pharmacotherapy,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 36
(1979): 1261–1269; M. M. Weissman, B. A. Prusoff, A. De Mascio, C.
Neu, M. Goklaney, and G. L. Klerman, “The Efficacy of Drugs and
Psychotherapy in the Treatment of Acute Depressive Episodes,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 136 (1979): 555–558; D. S. Janowsky and R. J.
Neborsky, “Hypothesized Common Mechanism in the Psychotherapy and
Psychopharmacology of Depression,” Psychiatric Annals, 10 (1980): 356–
361; I. M. Blackburn, S. Bishop, A. I. M. Glen, L. J. Whalley, and J. E.
Christie, “The Efficacy of Cognitive Therapy and Pharmacotherapy, Each
Alone and in Combination,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 139 (1981):
181–189; G. E. Murphy, A. D. Simons, R. D. Wetzel, and P. J. Lustman,
“Cognitive Therapy and Pharmacotherapy: Singly and Together in the
Treatment of Depression,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 41 (1984): 33–

41; E. Frank and D. J. Kupfer, “Maintenance Treatment of Recurrent
Unipolar Depression: Pharmacology and Psychotherapy,” in D. Demali and
G. Racagni, eds., Chronic Treatments in Neuropsychiatry (New York:
Raven Press, 1985), pp. 139–151.
42 
convincing 
recent 
work: 
S. 
Cochran, 
“Preventing 
Medical
Noncompliance in the Outpatient Treatment of Bipolar Affective
Disorders,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 52 (1984):
873–878; K. Jamison, “Manic-Depressive Illness: The Overlooked Need for
Psychotherapy,” in B. Beitman and G. Klerman, eds., Integrating
Pharmacotherapy and Psychotherapy (Washington, D.C.: American
Psychiatric Association, 1991), pp. 409–420; E. Frank, D. Kupfer, C.
Ehlers, T. Monk, C. Cornes, S. Carter, and D. Frankel, “Interpersonal and
Social Rhythm Therapy for Bipolar Disorder: Integrating Interpersonal and
Behavioral Approaches,” Behavior Therapist, 17 (1994): 143–149; A. F.
Lehman, “Vocational Rehabilitation for Schizophrenia,” Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 21 (1995): 645–656; J. Scott, “Psychotherapy for Bipolar
Disorder,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 167 (1995): 581–588; M. Basco
and A. J. Rush, Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Bipolar Disorder (New
York: Guilford, 1996); I. R. H. Falloon, J. H. Coverdale, and C. Brooker,
“Psychosocial Interventions in Schizophrenia: A Review,” International
Journal of Mental Health, 25 (1996): 3–23; D. Miklowitz, “Psychotherapy
in Combination with Drug Treatment for Bipolar Disorder,” Journal of
Clinical Psychopharmacology, 16 (Suppl.) (1996): 56–66; D. Miklowitz, E.
Frank, and E. George, “New Psychosocial Treatments for the Outpatient
Management of Bipolar Disorder,” Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 32
(1996): 613–621; D. L. Penn and K. T. Mueser, “Research Update on the
Psychosocial Treatment of Schizophrenia,” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 153 (1996): 607–617; E. Frank, S. Hlastala, P. Houck, X. M.
Tu, T. Monk, A. Mallinger, and D. Kupfer, “Inducing Lifestyle Regularity
in Recovering Bipolar Disorder Patients: Results from the Maintenance
Therapies in Bipolar Disorder Protocol,” Biological Psychiatry, 41 (1997):
1165–1173; J. M. Harkavy-Friedman and E. A. Nelson, “Assessment and
Intervention for the Suicidal Patient with Schizophrenia,” Psychiatric
Quarterly, 68 (1997): 361–375; I. R. H. Falloon, R. Roncone, U. Malm, and
J. H. Coverdale, “Effective and Efficient Treatment Strategies to Enhance
Recovery from Schizophrenia: How Much Longer Will People Have to
Wait Before We Provide Them?” Psychiatric Rehabilitation Skills, 2
(1998): 107–127.

43 “Why do we now give psychiatrists”: T. S. Szasz, “A Moral View on
Suicide,” in D. Jacobs and H. N. Brown, eds., Suicide: Understanding and
Responding (Madison, Conn.: International Universities Press, 1989), pp.
437–447, pp. 442, 446.
44 The legal complaint: State of New York, County of Onondaga, Hilde
Klein v. Thomas Szasz, M.D., August 2, 1994; justice presiding: Hon.
Parker J. Stone, J.S.C., Index No. 92-660, RJI No. 33-92-640.
45 “capacity to hear out carefully”: N. H. Cassem, “Treating the Person
Confronting Death,” in A. M. Nicholi, ed., Harvard Guide to Modern
Psychiatry (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press,
1978), pp. 579–606, p. 595.
46 “Because the doctors cared”: M. Coate, Beyond All Reason (London:
Constable, 1964), p. 214.
47 twenty controlled clinical trials: P. M. Salkovskis, C. Atha, and D.
Storer, “Cognitive-Behavioral Problem Solving in the Treatment of Patients
Who Repeatedly Attempt Suicide: A Controlled Trial,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 157 (1990): 871–876; M. M. Linehan, H. E. Armstrong, A.
Suarez, D. Allmon, and H. L. Heard, “Cognitive Behavioral Treatment of
Chronically Parasuicidal Borderline Patients,” Archives of General
Psychiatry, 48 (1991): 1060–1064; M. M. Linehan, H. L. Heard, and H. E.
Armstrong, “Naturalistic Follow-up of a Behavioral Treatment for
Chronically Parasuicidal Borderline Patients,” Archives of General
Psychiatry, 50 (1993): 971–974; C. Van Heeringen, S. Jannes, W. Buylaert,
H. Henderick, D. De Bacquer, and J. van Remoortel, “The Management of
Non-Compliance with Referral to Outpatient After-Care Among Attempted
Suicide Patients: A Controlled Intervention Study,” Psychological
Medicine, 25 (1995): 963–970; M. M. Linehan, “Behavioral Treatments of
Suicidal Behaviors: Definitional Obfuscation and Treatment Outcomes,”
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 836 (1997): 302–328; R. van
der Sande, E. Buskens, E. Allart, Y. van der Graaf, and H. van Engeland,
“Psychosocial Intervention Following Suicide Attempt: A Systematic
Review of Treatment Interventions,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 96
(1997): 43–50; K. Hawton, E. Arensman, E. Townsend, S. Bremner, E.
Feldman, R. Goldney, D. Gunnell, P. Hazell, K. van Heeringen, A. House,
D. Owens, I. Sakinofsky, and L. Träskman-Bendz, “Deliberate Self-Harm:
Systematic Review of Efficacy of Psychosocial and Pharmacological
Treatments in Preventing Repetition,” British Medical Journal, 317 (1998):
441–447. Preliminary data from the University of Pittsburgh suggest that

structured psychotherapy in conjunction with sleep and other forms of
biological regulation may reduce active suicidal ideation in bipolar patients
(Ellen Frank, Ph.D., personal communication, April 15, 1999).
48 situations of interpersonal conflict: J. Birtchnell, “Some Familial and
Clinical Characteristics of Female Suicidal Psychiatric Patients,” British
Journal of Psychiatry, 138 (1981): 381–390; K. Hawton, D. Cole, J.
O’Grady, and M. Osborn, “Motivational Aspects of Deliberate Self-
Poisoning in Adolescents,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 141 (1982): 286–
291; K. Hawton and J. Catalan, Attempted Suicide: A Practical Guide to Its
Nature and Management (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1982); D.
James and K. Hawton, “Explanations and Attitudes in Self-Poisoners and
Significant Others,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 146 (1985): 481–485; B.
C. McLeavey, R. J. Daly, J. W. Ludgate, and C. M. Murray, “Interpersonal
Problem-Solving Skills Training in the Treatment of Self-Poisoning
Patients,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 24 (1994): 382–394.
49 Perhaps 20 percent: J. A. Urquhart, “A Call for a New Discipline,”
Pharmacology Technology, 11 (1987): 16–17.
50 in medical conditions such as epilepsy: D. L. Sacket, “The Magnitude of
Compliance and Noncompliance,” in D. L. Sacket and R. B. Haynes, eds.,
Compliance with Therapeutic Regimens (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1976), pp. 9–25; J. A. Cramer and R. Rosenbeck,
“Compliance with Medication Regimens for Mental and Physical
Disorders,” Psychiatric Services, 49 (1988): 196–201.
51 For patients taking antidepressants: J. L. Young, H. V. Zonana, and L.
Shepler, “Medication Noncompliance in Schizophrenia: Codification and
Update,” Bulletin of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, 14
(1986): 105–122; F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison, Manic-Depressive
Illness (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990); W. S. Fenton and T. H.
McGlashan, “Schizophrenia: Individual Psychotherapy,” in H. I. Kaplan
and B. J. Sadock, eds., Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry, 6th ed., vol.
1, (Baltimore: William & Wilkins, 1995), pp. 1007–1018; S. A.
Montgomery and S. Kasper, “Comparison of Compliance Between
Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors and Tricyclic Antidepressants: A Meta-
Analysis,” International Clinical Psychopharmaology, 9 (Suppl. 4) (1995):
33–40; W. S. Fenton, C. R. Blyler, and R. K. Heinssen, “Determinants of
Medication Compliance in Schizophrenia: Empirical and Clinical
Findings,” Schizophrenia Bulletin, 23 (1997): 637–651; J. Garavan, S.
Browne, M. Gervin, A. Lane, C. Larkin, and E. O’Callaghan, “Compliance

with Neuroleptic Medication in Outpatients with Schizophrenia,”
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 39 (1998): 215–219; E. Frank, R. F. Prien, D. J.
Kupfer, and L. Alberts, “Implications of Noncompliance on Research in
Affective Disorders,” Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 21 (1985): 37–42.
52 The one study that directly compared: P. E. Keck, S. L. McElroy, S. M.
Strakowski, M. L. Bourne, and S. A. West, “Compliance with Maintenance
Treatment in Bipolar Disorder,” Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 33 (1997):
87–91. An earlier short-term study found essentially no differences in
compliance between lithium and valproate; see C. L. Bowden, A. M.
Brugger, A. C. Swann, J. R. Calabrese, P. G. Janicak, F. Petty, S. C.
Dilsaver, J. M. Davis, A. J. Rush, J. G. Small, E. S. Garza-Treviño, S. C.
Risch, P. J. Goodnick, and D. D. Morris, “Efficacy of Divalproex vs.
Lithium and Placebo in the Treatment of Mania,” Journal of the American
Medical Association, 271 (1994): 918–924.
53 Compliance rates are even lower: H. M. Bogard, “Follow-up Study of
Suicidal Patients Seen in Emergency Room Consultation,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 126 (1970): 141–144; N. Kreitman, “Reflections on
the Management of Parasuicide,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 125 (1979):
275; H. G. Morgan, C. J. Burns-Cox, H. Pocock, and S. Pottle, “Deliberate
Self-Harm: Clinical and Socio-Economic Characteristics of 368 Patients,”
British Journal of Psychiatry, 134 (1979): 335–342; I. F. Litt, W. R.
Cuskey, and S. Rudd, “Emergency Room Evaluation of the Adolescent
Who Attempts Suicide: Compliance with Follow-up,” Journal of
Adolescent Health Care, 4 (1983): 106–108; E. Taylor and A. Stansfeld,
“Children Who Poison Themselves: I. A Clinical Comparison with
Psychiatric Controls. II. Prediction of Attendance for Treatment,” British
Journal of Psychiatry, 122 (1984): 1248–1257; G. O’Brien, A. R. Holton,
K. Hurren, L. Watt, and F. Hassanyeh, “Deliberate Self-Harm and
Predictors of Outpatient Attendance,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 150
(1987): 246–247; R. B. Vukmir, R. Kremen, D. A. Dehart, and J.
Menegazzi, “Compliance with Emergency Department Patient Referral,”
American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 10 (1992): 413–417; P. D.
Trautman, N. Stewart, and A. Morishima, “Are Adolescent Suicide
Attempters Noncompliant with Outpatient Care?” Journal of the American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 32 (1993): 89–94.
54 Psychotherapy increases medication compliance: S. D. Cochran,
“Preventing Medical Noncompliance in the Outpatient Treatment of Bipolar
Affective Disorders,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 52

(1984): 873–878; F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison, Manic-Depressive
Illness (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990); D. J. Miklowitz and M.
J. Goldstein, “Behavioral Family Treatment for Patients with Bipolar
Affective Disorder,” Behavior Modification, 14 (1990): 457–489; D. J.
Miklowitz and M. J. Goldstein, Bipolar Disorder: A Family-Focused
Treatment Approach (New York: Guilford, 1997).
55 some, but not all, of the programs: R. Allard, M. Marshall, and M. C.
Plante, “Intensive Follow-up Does Not Decrease the Risk of Repeat Suicide
Attempts,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 22 (1992): 303–314; C.
Van Heeringen, S. Jannes, W. Buylaert, H. Henderick, D. De Bacquer, and
J. Van Remoortel, “The Management of Non-Compliance with Referral to
Outpatient Aftercare Among Attempted Suicide Patients: A Controlled
Intervention Study,” Psychological Medicine, 25 (1995): 963–970; M. J.
Rotheram-Borus, J. Piacentini, R. Roosem Can, F. Grace, C. Cantwell, D.
Castro-Blanco, S. Miller, and J. Feldman, “Enhancing Treatment Adherence
with a Specialized Emergency Room Program for Adolescent Suicide
Attempters,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 35 (1996): 654–663; A. Spirito, “Improving Treatment
Compliance Among Adolescent Suicide Attempters,” Crisis, 17 (1996):
152–154; R. van der Sande, L. Van Rooijen, E. Buskens, E. Allart, K.
Hawton, Y. van der Graaf, and H. van Engeland, “Intensive Inpatient and
Community Intervention Versus Routine Care After Attempted Suicide: A
Randomised Controlled Intervention Study,” British Journal of Psychiatry,
171 (1997): 35–41; D. C. Daley, I. M. Salloum, A. Zuckoff, L. Kirisci, and
M. E. Thase, “Increasing Treatment Adherence Among Outpatients with
Depression and Cocaine Dependence: Results of a Pilot Study,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 155 (1998): 1611–1613; R. Kemp, G. Kirov, B.
Everitt, P. Hayward, and A. David, “Randomised Controlled Trial of
Compliance Therapy: 18-Month Follow-up,” British Journal of Psychiatry,
172 (1998): 413–419; D. Spooren, C. Van Heeringen, and C. Jannes,
“Strategies to Increase Compliance with Outpatient Aftercare Among
Patients Referred to a Psychiatric Emergency Department: A Multi-Centre
Controlled Intervention Study,” Psychological Medicine, 28 (1998): 949–
956.
56 Being well informed: These issues are further discussed in K. R.
Jamison, “Psychotherapeutic Issues and Suicide Prevention in the
Treatment of Bipolar Disorders,” in R. E. Hales and A. J. Frances, eds.,
American Psychiatric Association Annual Review, vol. 6 (Washington,

D.C.: American Psychiatric Press, 1987), pp. 108–124; K. R. Jamison,
“Suicide Prevention in Depressed Women,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
49 (1988): 42–45; F. K. Goodwin and K. R. Jamison, Manic-Depressive
Illness (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990).
57 Several recent clinical studies: D. Miklowitz and M. Goldstein,
“Behavioral Family Therapy Treatment for Patients with Bipolar Affective
Disorder,” Behavioral Modification, 14 (1990): 457–489; E. Van Gent and
F. Zwart, “Psychoeducation of Partners of Bipolar Manic Patients,” Journal
of Affective Disorders, 21 (1991): 15–18; H. J. Moller, “Attempted Suicide:
Efficacy of Different Aftercare Strategies,” International Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 6 (Suppl. 6) (1992): 58–59; C. A. King, J. D. Hovey,
E. Brand, R. Wilson, and N. Ghaziuddin, “Suicidal Adolescents After
Hospitalization: Parent and Family Impacts on Treatment Follow-through,”
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 36
(1997): 85–93; A. Perry, N. Tarrier, R. Morriss, E. McCarthy, and K. Limb,
“Randomised Controlled Trial of Efficacy of Teaching Patients with Bipolar
Disorder to Identify Early Symptoms of Relapse and Obtain Treatment,”
British Medical Journal, 318 (1999): 149–153.
58 “And, when our lives crack”: Sylvia Plath, March 6, 1956, in T. Hughes
and F. McCullough, eds., The Journals of Sylvia Plath (New York:
Ballantine Books, 1983), p. 125.
59 Take your friend or family member seriously: National Depressive and
Manic-Depressive Association, Suicide and Depressive Illness (Chicago:
NDMDA, 1996). Detailed information about mental illness, medication,
and suicide for doctors, patients, and family members can be found in R. J.
Wyatt, Practical Psychiatric Practice, 2d ed. (Washington, D.C.: American
Psychiatric Association Press, 1998).
60 “I have a mental disorder”: A. Kent, “Perspectives,” Diversity &
Distinction, 2 (1996): 23.
61 “Take a look around”: A. Kent, “Balancing Act: A Battle with Manic
Depression Inspires One Student to Lead a Crusade for Mental Health
Awareness,” Harvard Independent, March 25, 1999.
9 • AS A SOCIETY
1 “As a society”: D. Satcher, “Bringing the Public Health Approach to the
Problem of Suicide,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 28 (1998):

325–327, p. 326. David Satcher was appointed by President Clinton in 1998
to the position of Assistant Secretary for Health and Surgeon General of the
United States. A physician and scientist, Dr. Satcher previously served as
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.
2 “What was constant”: P. Perl, “A Bridge He Could Not Cross,”
Washington Post Magazine, November 14, 1993.
3 twice as likely to kill themselves: K. D. Rose and I. Rosow, “Physicians
Who Kill Themselves,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 29 (1973): 800–
805; C. L. Rich and F. N. Pitts, “Suicide by Male Physicians During a Five-
Year Period,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 136 (1979): 1089–1090; A.
H. Rimpelä, M. M. Nurminen, P. O. Pulkkinen, M. K. Rimpelä, and T.
Valkonen, “Mortality of Doctors: Do Doctors Benefit from their Medical
Knowledge?” Lancet, 1 (1987): 84–86; S. Lindeman, E. Läärä, H. Hakko,
and J. Lönnqvist, “A Systematic Review on Gender-Specific Suicide
Mortality in Medical Doctors,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 168 (1996):
274–279; K. Juel, J. Mosbech, and E. S. Hansen, “Mortality and Cause of
Death Among Danish Physicians, 1973–1992.” Ugeskrift for Læger, 159
(1997): 6512–6518.
4 Psychiatrists and anesthesiologists: D. L. Bruce, “Causes of Death
Among Anesthesiologists: A 20-Year Survey,” Anesthesiology, 29 (1968):
565–569; A. G. Craig and F. N. Pitts, “Suicide by Physicians,” Diseases of
the Nervous System, 29 (1968): 763–772; D. E. DeSole, P. Singer, and S.
Aronson, “Suicide and Role Strain Among Physicians,” International
Journal of Social Psychiatry, 15 (1969): 294–301; C. L. Rich and F. N.
Pitts, “Suicide by Psychiatrists: A Study of Medical Specialists Among
18,730 Consecutive Physician Deaths During a Five-Year Period, 1967–
1972,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 41 (1980): 261–263; B. B. Arnetz, L.
G. Hörte, A. Hedberg, T. Theorell, E. Allander, and H. Malker, “Suicide
Patterns Among Physicians Related to Other Academics as Well as to the
General Population,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 75 (1987): 139–143;
L. M. Carpenter and A. J. Swerdlow, “Mortality of Doctors in Different
Specialties: Findings from a Cohort of 20,000 NHS Hospital Consultants,”
Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 54 (1997): 388–395; S.
Lindeman, E. Läärä, J. Hirvonen, and J. Lönnqvist, “Suicide Mortality
Among Medical Doctors in Finland: Are Females More Prone to Suicide
Than Their Male Colleagues?” Psychological Medicine, 27 (1997): 1219–
1222.
5 women doctors are three to five: R. C. Steppacher and J. S. Mausner,

“Suicide in Male and Female Physicians,” Journal of the American Medical
Association, 228 (1974): 323–328; F. N. Pitts, A. B. Schuller, C. L. Rich,
and A. F. Pitts, “Suicide Among U.S. Women Physicians, 1967–1972,”
American Journal of Psychiatry, 136 (1979): 694–696; F. Pepitone-
Arreola-Rockwell, D. Rockwell, and N. Core, “Fifty-Two Medical Student
Suicides,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 138 (1981): 198–201; W.
Simon, “Suicide Among Physicians: Prevention and Postvention,” Crisis, 7
(1986): 1–13; S. M. Schlicht, I. R. Gordon, J. R. B. Ball, and D. G. S.
Christie, “Suicide and Related Deaths in Victorian Doctors,” Medical
Journal of Australia, 153 (1990): 518–521; C.-G. Stefansson and S. Wicks,
“Health Care Occupations and Suicide in Sweden 1961–1985,” Social
Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 26 (1991): 259–264; S.
Lindeman, E. Läärä, H. Hakko, and J. Lönnqvist, “A Systematic Review on
Gender-Specific Suicide Mortality in Medical Doctors,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 168 (1996): 274–279; L. M. Carpenter and A. J. Swerdlow,
“Mortality of Doctors in Different Specialities: Findings from a Cohort of
20,000 NHS Hospital Consultants,” Occupational and Environmental
Medicine, 54 (1997): 388–395; S. Lindeman, E. Läärä, J. Hirvonen, and J.
Lönnqvist, “Suicide Mortality Among Medical Doctors in Finland: Are
Females More Prone to Suicide Than Their Male Colleagues?”
Psychological Medicine, 27 (1997): 1219–1222.
6 Women psychologists and chemists: P. H. Blachly, H. T. Osterud, and R.
Josslin, “Suicide in Professional Groups,” New England Journal of
Medicine, 268 (1963): 1278–1282; F. P. Li, “Suicide Among Chemists,”
Archives of Environmental Health, 19 (1969): 518–520; H. King, “Health in
the Medical and Other Learned Professions,” Journal of Chronic Disease,
23 (1970): 257–281; J. S. Mausner and R. C. Steppacher, “Suicide in
Professionals: A Study of Male and Female Psychologists,” American
Journal of Epidemiology, 98 (1973): 436–445; J. Walrath, F. P. Li, S. K.
Hoar, M. W. Mead, and J. F. Fraumeni, “Causes of Death Among Female
Chemists,” American Journal of Public Health, 75 (1985): 883–885.
7 Women also probably experience: J. Firth-Cozens, “Sources of Stress in
Women Junior House Officers,” British Medical Journal, 301 (1990): 89–
91.
8 stress and depression are common: K. Hsu and V. Marshall, “Prevalence
of Depression and Distress in a Large Sample of Canadian Residents,
Interns, and Fellows,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 144 (1987): 1561–
1566.

9 and sleep deprivation: T. A. Wehr, D. A. Sack, and N. E. Rosenthal,
“Sleep Reduction as a Final Common Pathway in the Genesis of Mania,”
American Journal of Psychiatry, 144 (1987): 201–204; D. E. Duncan,
Residents: The Perils and Promise of Educating Young Doctors (New York:
Scribner, 1996).
10 “things seem inexplicable”: S. B. Nuland, How We Die: Reflections on
Life’s Final Chapter (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1994), p. 151.
11 Yet nearly a third: B. Barraclough, J. Bunch, B. Nelson, and P.
Sainsbury, “A Hundred Cases of Suicide: Clinical Aspects,” British Journal
of Psychiatry, 125 (1974): 355–373; K. Hawton and E. Blackstock,
“General 
Practice 
Aspects 
of 
Self-Poisoning 
and 
Self-Injury,”
Psychological Medicine, 6 (1976): 571–575; J. Bancroft, A. Skrimshire, J.
Casson, O. Harvard-Watts, and F. Reynolds, “People Who Deliberately
Poison or Injure Themselves: Their Problems and Their Contacts With
Helping Agencies,” Psychological Medicine, 7 (1977): 289–303; D. H.
Myers and C. D. Neal, “Suicide in Psychiatric Patients,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 133 (1978): 38–44; J. Beskow, “Suicide and Mental Disorder in
Swedish Men,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 277 (Suppl.) (1979); S. E.
Borg and M. Stahl, “Prediction of Suicide: A Prospective Study of Suicides
and Control Among Psychiatric Patients,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica,
65 (1982): 221–232; R. M. Turner, “Parasuicide in an Urban General
Practice, 1970–1979,” Journal of the Royal College of General Practice, 32
(1982): 273–281; K. Petrie, “Recent General Practice Contacts of
Hospitalized Suicide Attempters,” New Zealand Medical Journal, 102
(1989): 130–131; E. T. Isometsä, M. E. Heikkinen, M. J. Marttunen, M. M.
Henriksson, H. M. Aro, and J. K. Lönnqvist, “The Last Appointment
Before Suicide: Is Suicide Intent Communicated?” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 152 (1995): 919–922; L. Appleby, T. Amos, U. Doyle, B.
Tomenson, and M. Woodman, “General Practitioners and Young Suicides:
A Preventive Role for Primary Care,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 168
(1996): 330–333; A. L. Beautrais, P. R. Joyce, and R. T. Mulder,
“Psychiatric Contacts Among Youths Aged 13 Through 24 Years Who
Have Made Serious Suicide Attempts,” Journal of the American Academy
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 37 (1998): 504–511; J. Pirkis and P.
Burgess, “Suicide and Recency of Health Care Contacts: A Systematic
Review,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 173 (1998): 462–474.
12 Some doctors remain skeptical: R. F. W. Diekstra and M. van Egmond,
“Suicide and Attempted Suicide in General Practice, 1979–1986,” Acta

Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 79 (1989): 268–275; A. Macdonald, “The Myth
of Suicide Prevention by General Practitioners,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 163 (1993): 260; H. G. Morgan and M. O. Evans, “How
Negative Are We to the Idea of Suicide Prevention?” Journal of the Royal
Society of Medicine, 87 (1994): 622–625; K. Power, C. Davies, V. Swanson,
D. Gordon, and H. Carter, “Case-Control Study of GP Attendance Rates by
Suicide Cases with or Without a Psychiatric History,” British Journal of
General Practice, 47 (1997): 211–215.
13 the Swedish Committee for the Prevention and Treatment: W. Rutz, L.
von Knorring, and J. Wålinder, “Frequency of Suicide on Gotland After
Systematic Postgraduate Education of General Practitioners,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 80 (1989): 151–154; W. Rutz, J. Wålinder, G.
Eberhard, G. Holmberg, A.-L. von Knorring, L. von Knorring, B. Wistedt,
and A. Åberg-Wistedt, “An Educational Program on Depressive Disorders
for General Practitioners on Gotland: Background and Evaluation,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 79 (1989): 19–26; A. Macdonald, “The Myth of
Suicide Prevention by General Practitioners,” British Journal of Psychiatry,
163 (1993): 260; H. G. Morgan and K. Hawton, “Suicide Prevention,”
British Journal of Psychiatry, 164 (1994): 126–127; J. M. G. Williams and
R. D. Goldney, “Suicide Prevention in Gotland,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 165 (1994): 692–698; Z. Rihmer, W. Rutz, and H. Pihlgren,
“Depression and Suicide on Gotland: An Intensive Study of All Suicides
Before and After a Depression-Training Program for General Practitioners,”
Journal of Affective Disorders, 35 (1995): 147–152.
14 Widespread screening: Canadian Task Force on the Periodic Health
Examination, Canadian Guide to Clinical Preventive Health Care (Ottawa:
Canada Communication Group, 1994), pp. 450–455; United States
Preventive Services Task Force, “Screening for Depression,” Guide to
Clinical Preventive Services, 1996; C. P. Schade, E. R. Jones, and B. J.
Wittlin, “A Ten-Year Review of the Validity and Clinical Utility of
Depression Screening,” Psychiatric Services, 49 (1998): 55–61.
15 automated interviews: J. H. Greist, D. H. Gustafson, and F. A. Strauss,
“A Computer Interview for Suicide-Risk Prediction,” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 130 (1973): 1327–1332; H. P. Erdman, J. H. Greist, D. H.
Gustafson, J. E. Taves, and M. H. Klein, “Suicide Risk Prediction by
Computer Interview: A Prospective Study,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
48 (1987): 464–467; S. Levine, R. J. Ancill, and A. P. Roberts, “Assessment
of Suicide Risk by Computer-Delivered Self-Rating Questionnaire:

Preliminary Findings,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 80 (1989): 216–
220; K. A. Kobak, L. v. H. Taylor, S. L. Dottl, J. H. Greist, J. W. Jefferson,
D. Burroughs, J. M. Mantle, D. J. Katzelnick, R. Norton, H. J. Henk, and R.
C. Serlin, “A Computer-Administered Telephone Interview to Identify
Mental Disorders,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 278
(1997): 905–910.
16 National Depression Screening Day: D. G. Jacobs, “Depression
Screening as an Intervention Against Suicide,” Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 60 (Suppl. 2) (1999): 42–45.
17 biological tests: V. Arango, M. D. Underwood, and J. J. Mann,
“Postmortem Findings in Suicide Victims: Implications for in Vivo Imaging
Studies,” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 836 (1997): 269–
287; J. J. Mann, M. Oquendo, M. D. Underwood, and V. Arango, “The
Neurobiology of Suicide Risk,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60 (Suppl.
2) (1999): 7–11; A. Roy, D. Nielsen, G. Rylander, M. Sarchiapone, and N.
Segal, “Genetics of Suicide in Depression,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
60 (Suppl. 2) (1999): 12–17.
18 young men in jails or prisons: Suicide rates in jails and prisons are three
to five times the expected rate: J. E. Smialek and W. U. Spitz, “Death
Behind Bars,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 240 (1978):
2563–2564; D. O. Topp, “Suicide in Prison,” British Journal of Psychiatry,
134 (1979): 24–27, R. L. Bonner, “Isolation, Seclusion, and Psychosocial
Vulnerability as Risk Factors for Suicide Behind Bars,” in R. W. Maris, A.
L. Berman, J. T. Maltsberger, and R. I Yufit, eds., Assessment and
Prediction of Suicide (New York: Guilford, 1992), pp. 398–419; A. R.
Felthous, “Preventing Jailhouse Suicides,” Bulletin of the American
Academy of Psychiatry and Law, 22 (1994): 477–488; E. Blaauw, A.
Kerkhof, and R. Vermunt, “Suicides and Other Deaths in Police Custody,”
Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 27 (1997): 153–163; J. F. Cox and
P. C. Morschauser, “A Solution to the Problem of Jail Suicide,” Crisis, 18
(1977): 178–184; L. M. Hayes and E. Blaauw, “Prison Suicide: A Special
Issue,” Crisis, 18 (1997): 145–192; M. Joukamaa, “Prison Suicide in
Finland, 1969–1992,” Forensic Science International, 89 (1997): 167–174;
N. H. Polvi, “Assessing Risk of Suicide in Correctional Settings,” in C. D.
Webster and M. A. Jackson, eds., Impulsivity: Theory, Assessment, and
Treatment (New York: Guilford, 1997), pp. 278–301; F. Butterfield,
“Prisons Replace Hospitals for the Nation’s Mentally Ill,” New York Times,
March 5, 1998.

19 police officers: P. Friedman, “Suicide Among Police: A Study of Ninety-
Three Suicides Among New York Policemen, 1934–1940,” in E.
Shneidman, ed., Essays in Self-Destruction (New York: Science House,
1968), pp. 414–449; C. H. Cantor, R. Tyman, and P. J. Slater, “A Historical
Survey of Police Suicide in Queensland, Australia, 1843–1992,” Suicide
and Life-Threatening Behavior, 25 (1995): 499–507; J. M. Violanti, Police
Suicide: Epidemic in Blue (Springfield, Ill.: Charles C. Thomas, 1996).
20 gamblers: D. P. Phillips, W. R. Welty, and M. M. Smith, “Elevated
Suicide Levels Associated with Legalized Gambling,” Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior, 27 (1997): 373–377.
21 homosexual and bisexual men: C. L. Rich, R. C. Fowler, D. Young, and
M. Blenkush, “The San Diego Suicide Study: Comparison of Gay to
Straight Males,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 16 (1986): 448–
457; D. Shaffer, P. Fisher, R. Hicks, M. Parides, and M. Gould, “Sexual
Orientation in Adolescents Who Commit Suicide,” Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior, 25 (Suppl.) (1995): 64–70; C. Bagley and P.
Tremblay, “Suicidal Behaviors in Homosexual and Bisexual Males,” Crisis,
18 (1997): 24–34; G. Remafedi, S. French, M. Story, M. D. Resnick, and R.
Blum, “The Relationship Between Suicide Risk and Sexual Orientation:
Results of a Population-Based Study,” Americal Journal of Public Health,
88 (1998): 57–60.
22 Native Americans: J. Fox, D. Manitowabi, and J. A. Ward, “An Indian
Community with a High Suicide Rate—5 Years After,” Canadian Journal
of Psychiatry, 29 (1984): 425–427; L. J. D. Wallace, A. D. Calhoun, K. E.
Powell, J. O’Neil, and S. P. James, Homicide and Suicide Among Native
Americans, 1979–1992 (Atlanta, Ga.: Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention), 1996; M. EchoHawk, “Suicide: The Scourge of Native
American People,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 27 (1997): 60–
67.
23 Alaskan adolescents: B. D. Gessner, “Temporal Trends and Geographic
Patterns of Teen Suicide in Alaska, 1979–1993,” Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior, 27 (1997): 264–273.
24 young African-American males: J. T. Gibbs, ed., Young, Black, and Male
in America: An Endangered Species (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press,
1988); D. Shaffer, M. Gould, and R. C. Hicks, “Worsening Suicide Rate in
Black Teenagers,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 151 (1994): 1810–
1812; R. L. Taylor, ed., African-American Youth: Their Social and

Economic Status in the United States (Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 1995);
“Suicide Among Black Youths—United States, 1980–1995,” Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report, 47 (1998): 193–196.
25 adolescent boys in Micronesia: D. H. Rubinstein, “Epidemic Suicide
Among Micronesian Adolescents,” Social Science and Medicine, 17
(1983): 657–665; D. H. Rubinstein, “Suicide in Micronesia and Samoa: A
Critique of Explanations,” Pacific Studies, 15 (1992): 51–75; D. H.
Rubinstein, “Suicidal Behaviour in Micronesia,” in K. L. Peng and W.-S.
Tseng, eds., Suicidal Behaviour in the Asia-Pacific Region (Kent Ridge,
Singapore: University of Singapore Press, 1992), pp. 199–230.
26 inaccurate, misleading, and even damaging: J. C. Overholser, A. H.
Hemstreet, A. Spirito, and S. Vyse, “Suicide Awareness Programs in the
Schools: Effects of Gender and Personal Experience,” Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 28 (1989): 925–
930; V. Vieland, B. Whittle, A. Garland, R. Hicks, and D. Shaffer, “The
Impact of Curriculum-Based Suicide Prevention Programs for Teenagers:
An 18-Month Follow-up,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 30 (1991): 811–815; A. F. Garland and E. Zigler,
“Adolescent Suicide Prevention: Current Research and Social Policy
Implications,” American Psychologist, 48 (1993): 169–182; J. J. Mazza,
“School-Based Suicide Prevention Programs: Are They Effective?” School
Psychology Review, 26 (1997): 382–396.
27 Some investigators: J. Ciffone, “Suicide Prevention: A Classroom
Presentation to Adolescents,” Social Work, 38 (1993): 197–203; J. Kalafat
and M. Elias, “An Evaluation of School-Based Suicide Awareness
Intervention,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 24 (1994): 224–233;
L. L. Eggert, E. A. Thompson, J. R. Herting, and L. J. Nicholas, “Reducing
Suicide Potential Among High-Risk Youth: Tests of a School-Based
Prevention Program,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 25 (1995):
276–296; F. J. Zenere and P. J. Lazarus, “The Decline of Youth Suicidal
Behavior in an Urban, Multicultural Public School System Following the
Introduction of a Suicide Prevention and Intervention Program,” Suicide
and Life-Threatening Behavior, 27 (1997): 387–403.
28 The Australian review: P. Hazell and R. King, “Arguments for and
Against Teaching Suicide Prevention in Schools,” Australian and New
Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 30 (1996): 633–642, p. 640.
29 Canadians, likewise: J. Ploeg, D. Ciliska, M. Dobbins, S. Hayward, H.

Thomas, and J. Underwood, “A Systematic Overview of Adolescent
Suicide Prevention Programs,” Canadian Journal of Public Health, 87
(1996): 319–324.
30 a comprehensive American survey: A. Metha, B. Weber, and L. Dean
Webb, “Youth Suicide Prevention: A Survey and Analysis of Policies and
Efforts in the 50 States,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 28 (1998):
150–164.
31 “Many curriculum-based programs”: A. F. Garland and E. Zigler,
“Adolescent Suicide Prevention: Current Research and Social Policy
Implications,” American Psychologist, 48 (1993): 169–182, pp. 174–175.
32 “students who indicated”: A. Garland, D. Shaffer, and B. Whittle, “A
National Survey of School-Based, Adolescent Suicide Prevention
Programs,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 28 (1989): 931–934, p. 933.
33 David Shaffer and his colleagues: R. Beamish, “Computers Now
Helping to Screen for Troubled Teen-Agers,” New York Times, December
17, 1998; D. Shaffer and L. Craft, “Methods of Adolescent Suicide
Prevention,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60 (Suppl. 2) (1999): 70–74.
34 An early study: C. R. Bagley, “The Evaluation of a Suicide Prevention
Scheme by an Ecological Method,” Social Science and Medicine, 2 (1968):
1–14.
35 virtually every study since: I. Weiner, “The Effectiveness of a Suicide
Prevention Program,” Mental Hygiene, 53 (1969): 357–363; D. Lester,
“The Myth of Suicide Prevention,” Comprehensive Psychiatry, 13 (1972):
555–560; B. Bleach and W. L. Clairborn, “Initial Evaluation of Hot-Line
Telephone Crisis Centers,” Community Mental Health Journal, 10 (1974):
387–394; D. Lester, “Effect of Suicide Prevention Centers on Suicide Rates
in the United States (Health Services Report, No. 89), 1974, pp. 37–39; R.
Apster and M. Hodas, “Evaluating Hotlines with Simulated Calls,” Crisis
Intervention, 6 (1976): 14–21; T. P. Bridge, S. G. Potkin, W. W. K. Zung,
and B. J. Soldo, “Suicide Prevention Centres—Ecological Study of
Effectiveness,” Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases, 164 (1977): 18–
24; C. Jennings, B. M. Barraclough, and J. R. Moss, “Have the Samaritans
Lowered the Suicide Rate?—A Controlled Study,” Psychological Medicine,
8 (1978): 413–422; H. Hendin, Suicide in America (new and expanded
edition) (New York: W. W. Norton, 1995). 277 “the body of every young
woman”: F. B. Winslow, The Anatomy of Suicide (Boston: Longwood Press,

1978; first published 1840), p. 179.
36 “The grenadier Groblin”: Napoleon Bonaparte, quoted in F. B. Winslow,
The Anatomy of Suicide, p.178.
37 “There are many examples”: O. Anderson, Suicide in Victorian and
Edwardian England (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987), pp. 372–373.
38 There has been no shortage: A. L. Kobler and E. Stotland, The End of
Hope: A Social-Clinical Study of Suicide (New York: Free Press of
Glencoe, 1964); J. A. Ward and J. Fox, “A Suicide Epidemic on an Indian
Reserve,” Canadian Psychiatric Association Journal, 22 (1977): 423–426;
D. H. Rubinstein, “Epidemic Suicide Among Micronesian Adolescents,”
Social Science and Medicine, 17 (1983): 657–665; S. Fried, “Over the
Edge,” Philadelphia Magazine, October 1984; L. Coleman, Suicide
Clusters (Boston: Faber and Faber, 1986); J. W. Farrell, M. E. Petrone, and
W. E. Parkin, “Cluster of Suicides and Suicide Attempts—New Jersey,”
Journal of the American Medical Association, 259 (1988): 2666–2668; M.
S. Gould, S. Wallenstein, and L. Davidson, “Suicide Clusters: A Critical
Review,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 19 (1989): 17–29; T.
Taiminen, T. Salmenperä, and K. Lehtinen, “A Suicide Epidemic in a
Psychiatric Hospital,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 22 (1992):
350–363; N. Jans, “What Makes a Kid Happy One Day, Kill Himself the
Next?” USA Today, July 16, 1997; S. Rimer, “For Old South Boston,
Despair Replaces Hope,” New YorkTimes, August 17, 1997; J. Ritter, “Six
Suicides Rattle Campus in Michigan,” USA Today, July 10, 1997; P.
Belluck, “In Little City Safe from Violence, Rash of Suicides Leaves
Scars,” New York Times, April 5, 1998; M. Jordan, “Overcome with Grief:
Japanese Teens Distraught at Rock Star’s Death,” Washington Post, May 8,
1998.
39 in a study of: L. E. Davidson, M. L. Rosenberg, J. A. Mercy, J. Franklin,
and J. T. Simmons, “An Epidemiologic Study of Risk Factors in Two
Teenage Suicide Clusters,” Journal of the American Medical Association,
262 (1989): 2687–2692.
40 Many researchers believe: J. A. Motto, “Suicide and Suggestibility—
The Role of the Press,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 124 (1967): 252–
256; D. P. Phillips, “The Influence of Suggestion on Suicide: Substantive
and Theoretical Implications of the Werther Effect,” American Sociological
Review, 39 (1974): 340–354; D. L. Altheide, “Airplane Accidents, Murder,
and the Mass Media: Comments on Phillips,” Social Forces, 60 (1981):

593–596; K. A. Bollen and D. P. Phillips, “Imitative Suicides: A National
Study of the Effects of Television News Stories,” American Sociological
Review, 47 (1982): 802–809; I. M. Wasserman, “Imitation and Suicide: A
Reexamination of the Werther Effect,” American Sociological Review, 49
(1984): 427–436; J. N. Baron & P. C. Reiss, “Same Time, Next Year:
Aggregate Analyses of the Mass Media and Violent Behavior,” American
Sociological Review, 50 (1985): 347–363; L. Eisenberg, “Does Bad News
About Suicide Beget Bad News?” New England Journal of Medicine, 315
(1986): 705–707; S. J. Ellis and S. Walsh, “Soap May Seriously Damage
Your Health,” Lancet, 1 (1986): 686; B. P. Fowler, “Emotional Crisis
Imitating Television,” Lancet, 1 (1986): 1036–1037; M. S. Gould and D.
Shaffer, “The Impact of Suicide in Television Movies,” New England
Journal of Medicine, 315 (1986): 690–694; D. P. Phillips and L. Cartensen,
“Clustering of Teenage Suicides After Television News Stories About
Suicide,” New England Journal of Medicine, 315 (1986): 685–689; D. A.
Sandler, P. A. Connell, and K. Welsh, “Emotional Crises Imitating
Television,” Lancet, 1 (1986): 856; A. L. Berman, “Fictional Depiction of
Suicide in Television Films and Imitation Effects,” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 145 (1988): 982–986; A. Schmidtke and H. Häfner, “The
Werther Effect After Television Films: New Evidence for an Old
Hypothesis,” Psychological Medicine, 18 (1988): 665–676; L. Davidson
and M. S. Gould, “Contagion as a Risk Factor for Youth Suicide,” in Report
of the Secretary’s Task Force on Youth Suicide, Vol. 2: Risk Factors for
Youth Suicide (DHHS Publication Number ADM-89-1622), Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1989; R. C. Kessler, G. Downey,
H. Stipp, and J. R. Milavsky, “Network Television News Stories About
Suicide and Short-Term Changes in Total U.S. Suicides,” Journal of
Nervous and Mental Diseases, 177 (1989): 551–555; M. S. Gould, “Suicide
Clusters and Media Exposure,” in S. J. Blumenthal and D. J. Kupfer, eds.,
Suicide over the Life Cycle (Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Press,
1990), pp. 517–532; S. Stack, “Media Impacts on Suicide,” in D. Lester,
ed., Current Concepts of Suicide (Philadelphia: Charles Press, 1990), pp.
107–120; K. Jonas, “Modelling and Suicide: A Test of the Werther Effect,”
British Journal of Social Psychology, 31 (1992): 295–306; S. Simkin, K.
Hawton, L. Whitehead, J. Fagg, and M. Eagle, “Media Influence on
Parasuicide: A Study of the Effects of a Television Drama Portrayal of
Paracetamol Self-Poisoning,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 167 (1995):
754–759; D. M. Velting and M. S. Gould, “Suicide Contagion,” in R. W.
Maris, M. M. Silverman, and S. S. Canetto, eds., Review of Suicidology,

1997 (New York: Guilford, 1997), pp. 96–137.
41 In Hungary: S. Fekete and A. Schmidtke, “The Impact of Mass Media
Reports on Suicide and Attitudes Toward Self-Destruction: Previous
Studies and Some New Data from Hungary and Germany,” in B. L.
Mishara, ed., The Impact of Suicide (New York: Springer, 1995), pp. 142–
155.
42 Centers for Disease Control: P. W. O’Carroll and L. B. Potter, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, “Suicide Contagion and the Reporting
of Suicide: Recommendations from a National Workshop,” Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Record, 43 (1994): No. SS-6, 9–18, pp. 14–16.
43 Olive Anderson traces: O. Anderson, Suicide in Victorian and
Edwardian England (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987).
44 if deprived of one method: E. Stengel, Suicide and Attempted Suicide
(Harmondsworth, England: Penguin, 1964); C. Hassall and W. H.
Trethowan, “Suicide in Birmingham,” British Medical Journal, 1 (1972):
717–718; R. G. Oliver, “Rise and Fall of Suicide Rates in Australia:
Relation to Sedative Availability,” Medical Journal of Australia, 2 (1972):
1208–1209; A. Malleson, “Suicide Prevention: A Myth or a Mandate?”
British Journal of Psychiatry, 122 (1973): 238–239; F. A. Whitlock,
“Suicide in Brisbane, 1956 to 1973: The Drug-Death Epidemic,” Medical
Journal of Australia, 1 (1975): 737–743; N. Kreitman, “The Coal Gas
Story: United Kingdom Suicide Rates, 1960–71,” British Journal of
Preventive and Social Medicine, 30 (1976): 86–93; M. Boor, “Methods of
Suicide and Implications for Suicide Prevention,” Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 37 (1981): 70–75; J. A. Vale and T. J. Meredith, Poisoning:
Diagnosis and Treatment (London: Update Publications, 1981); N.
Kreitman and S. Platt, “Suicide, Unemployment, and Domestic Gas
Detoxification in Britain,” Journal of Epidemiology and Community
Health, 38 (1984): 1–6; P. Sainsbury, “The Epidemiology of Suicide,” in A.
Roy, ed., Suicide (Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1986), pp. 17–40; R. V.
Clarke and D. Lester, “Toxicity of Car Exhausts and Opportunity for
Suicide: Comparison Between Britain and the United States,” Journal of
Epidemiology and Community Health, 41 (1987): 114–120; S. A.
Montgomery and R. M. Pinder, “Do Some Antidepressants Promote
Suicide?” Psychopharmacology, 92 (1987): 265–266; S. A. Montgomery,
M. T. Lambert, and S. P. J. Lynch, “The Risk of Suicide and
Antidepressants,” International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 3 (1988):
15–24; P. W. Burvill, “The Changing Pattern of Suicide by Gassing in

Australia, 1910–1987: The Role of Natural Gas and Motor Vehicles,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 81 (1989): 178–184; C. H. Cantor and M. A.
Hill, “Suicide from River Bridges,” Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Psychiatry, 24 (1990): 377–380; S. Donovan and H. Freeman, “Deaths
Related to Antidepressants: A Reconsideration,” Journal of Drug
Development, 3 (1990): 113–120; D. Lester, “The Effect of the
Detoxification of Domestic Gas in Switzerland on the Suicide Rate,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 82 (1990): 383–384; M. J. Kelleher, M. Daly,
and M. J. A. Kelleher, “The Influence of Antidepressants in Overdose on
the Increased Suicide Rate in Ireland Between 1971 and 1988,” British
Journal of Psychiatry, 161 (1992): 625–628; G. Kleck, Point Blank: Guns
and Violence in America (New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1992); P. M.
Marzuk, A. C. Leon, K. Tardiff, E. B. Morgan, M. Stajic, and J. J. Mann,
“The Effect of Access to Lethal Methods of Injury on Suicide Rates,”
Archives of General Psychiatry, 49 (1992): 451–458; G. Isacsson, P.
Holmgren, D. Wasserman, and U. Bergman, “Use of Antidepressants
Among People Committing Suicide in Sweden,” British Medical Journal,
308 (1994): 506–509; P. W. O’Carroll and M. M. Silverman, “Community
Suicide Prevention: The Effectiveness of Bridge Barriers,” Suicide and
Life-Threatening Behavior, 24 (1994): 89–99; J. G. Edwards, “Suicide and
Antidepressants,” British Medical Journal, 310 (1995): 205–206; S. S. Jick,
A. D. Dean, and H. Jick, “Antidepressants and Suicide,” British Medical
Journal, 310 (1995): 215–218; A. Ohberg, J. Lönnqvist, S. Sarna, E. Vuori,
and A. Penttila, “Trends and Availability of Suicide Methods in Finland:
Proposals for Restrictive Measures,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 166
(1995): 35–43; M. W. Battersby, J. J. O’Mahoney, A. R. Beckwith, and J. L.
Hunt, “Antidepressant Deaths by Overdose,” Australian and New Zealand
Journal of Psychiatry, 30 (1996): 223–228; A. Carlsten, P. Allebeck, and L.
Brandt, “Are Suicide Rates in Sweden Associated with Changes in the
Prescribing of Medicines?” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 94 (1996): 94–
100; A. Ohberg, E. Vuori, I. Ojanperä, and J. Lönnqvist, “Alcohol and
Drugs in Suicide,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 169 (1996): 75–80; M.
Öström, J. Thorson, and A. Eriksson, “Carbon Monoxide Suicide from Car
Exhausts,” Social Science and Medicine, 42 (1996): 447–451; J. Neeleman
and S. Wessely, “Drugs Taken in Fatal and Non-Fatal Self-Poisoning: A
Study in South London,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 95 (1997): 283–
287; K. Hawton, “Why Has Suicide Increased in Young Males?” Crisis, 19
(1998): 119–124; E. T. Isometsä and J. K. Lönnqvist, “Suicide Attempts
Preceding Completed Suicide,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 173 (1998):

531–535; D. Gunnell, H. Wehner, and S. Frankel, “Sex Differences in
Suicide Trends in England and Wales,” Lancet, 353 (1999): 556–557.
45 During perestroika: I. M. Wasserman, “The Effect of War and Alcohol
Consumption Patterns on Suicide: United States, 1910–1933,” Social
Forces, 68 (1989): 513–530; D. Wasserman, A. Värnik, and G. Eklund,
“Male Suicides and Alcohol Consumption in the Former USSR,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 89 (1994): 306–313; A. Värnick, D.
Wasserman, M. Dankowicz, and G. Eklund, “Marked Decrease in Suicide
Among Men and Women in the Former USSR During Perestroika,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 98 (Suppl. 394) (1998): 13–19.
46 in 1996, 60 percent: U.S. National Center for Health Statistics, Vital
Statistics of the United States, Monthly Report, 45 (Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1997).
47 a gun in the home: D. A. Brent, J. A. Perper, C. E. Goldstein, D. J.
Kolko, M. J. Allan, C. J. Allman, and J. P. Zelenak, “Risk Factors for
Adolescent Suicide: A Comparison of Adolescent Suicide Victims with
Suicidal Inpatients,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 45 (1988): 581–588;
M. Boor and J. H. Bair, “Suicide Rates, Handgun Control Laws, and
Sociodemographic Variables,” Psychological Reports, 66 (1990): 923–930;
D. Lester, “The Availability of Firearms and the Use of Firearms for
Suicide: A Study of 20 Countries,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 81
(1990): 146–147; J. H. Sloan, F. P. Rivara, D. T. Reay, J. A. J. Ferris, and A.
L. Kellerman, “Firearm Regulations and Rates of Suicide: A Comparison of
Two Metropolitan Areas,” New England Journal of Medicine, 322 (1990):
369–373; D. A. Brent, J. A. Perper, C. J. Allman, G. M. Moritz, and M. E.
Wartella, “The Presence and Accessibility of Firearms in the Homes of
Adolescent Suicides: A Case-Control Study,” Journal of the American
Medical Association, 266 (1991): 2989–2995; C. Loftin, D. McDowall, B.
Wiersema, and T. J. Cottey, “Effects of Restrictive Licensing of Handguns
on Homicide and Suicide in the District of Columbia,” New England
Journal of Medicine, 325 (1991): 1615–1620; A. L. Kellerman, F. P. Rivara,
G. Somes, D. T. Reay, J. Francisco, J. G. Banton, J. Prodzinski, C. Fligner,
and B. B. Hackman, “Suicide in the Home in Relation to Gun Ownership,”
New England Journal of Medicine, 327 (1992): 467–472; D. A. Brent, J. A.
Perper, G. Moritz, M. Baugher, J. Schweers, and C. Roth, “Firearms and
Adolescent Suicide: A Community Case-Control Study,” American Journal
of Diseases of Children, 147 (1993): 1066–1071; M. Killias, “International
Correlations Between Gun Ownership and Rates of Homicide and Suicide,”

Canadian Medical Association Journal, 148 (1993): 1721–1725; D.
Hemenway, S. J. Solnick, and D. R. Azrael, “Firearm Training and
Storage,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 273 (1995): 46–50;
R. J. Blendon, J. T. Young, and D. Hemenway, “The American Public and
the Gun Control Debate,” Journal of the American Medical Association,
275 (1996): 1719–1722; P. Cummings, T. D. Koepsell, D. C. Grossman, J.
Savarino, and R. S. Thompson, “The Association Between the Purchase of
a Handgun and Homicide or Suicide,” American Journal of Public Health,
87 (1997): 974–978; J. Hintikka, J. Lehtonen, and V. Viinamäki, “Hunting
Guns in Homes and Suicides in 15–24 Year–Old Males in Eastern Finland,”
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 31 (1977): 858–861;
M. S. Kaplan and O. Geling, “Firearm Suicides and Homicides in the
United States: Regional Variations and Patterns of Gun Ownership,” Social
Science and Medicine, 46 (1998): 1227–1233; M. Miller and D.
Hemenway, “The Relationship Between Firearms and Suicide: A Review of
the Literature,” Aggression and Violent Behavior, 4 (1999): 59–75.
48 The American Academy of Pediatricians: L. Adelson, “The Gun and the
Sanctity of Human Life: Or the Bullet as Pathogen,” Archives of Surgery,
127 (1992): 171–176; T. L. Cheng and R. A. Lowe, “Taking Aim at Firearm
Injuries,” American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 11 (1993): 183–186;
J. J. Tepas, “Gun Control Legislation: A Major Public Health Issue for
Children,” Journal of Pediatric Surgery, 29 (1994): 369; C. W. Schwab and
D. R. Kauder, “Trauma Surgeons on Violence Prevention,” Trauma, 40
(1996): 671–672.
49 A survey of one thousand surgeons: C. K. Cassel, E. A. Nelson, T. W.
Smith, C. W. Schwab, B. Barlow, and N. E. Gary, “Internists’ and Surgeons’
Attitudes Toward Guns and Firearm Injury Prevention,” Annals of Internal
Medicine, 128 (1998): 224–230.
50 The American public: American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on
Adolescence, “Firearms and Adolescents,” Pediatrics, 89 (1992): 784–787;
P. Cummings, D. C. Grossman, F. P. Rivara, and T. D. Koepsell, “State Gun
Safe Storage Laws and Child Mortality Due to Firearms,” Journal of the
American Medical Association, 278 (1997): 1084–1086; S. P. Teret, D. W.
Webster, J. S. Vernick, T. W. Smith, D. Leff, G. J. Wintemute, P. J. Cook, D.
F. Hawkins, A. L. Kellerman, S. B. Sorenson, and S. De Francesco,
“Support for New Policies to Regulate Firearms,” New England Journal of
Medicine, 339 (1998): 813–818.
51 The Swedish National Program: The recommendations for reducing the

availability of instruments of suicide are taken directly from Swedish
National Council for Suicide Prevention, “Support in Suicidal Crises: The
Swedish National Program to Develop Suicide Prevention,” Crisis, 18
(1997): 65–72, p. 71.
52 including Norway, Finland: J. Lönnqvist, “National Suicide Prevention
Project in Finland: A Research Phase of the Project,” Psychiatrica Fennica,
19 (1988): 125–132; J. Lönnqvist, H. Aro, M. Heikkinen, H. Heilä, M.
Henriksson, E. Isometsä, K. Kuurne, M. Marttunen, A. Ostamo, M.
Pelkonen, S. Pirkola, J. Suokas, and K. Suominen, “Project Plan for Studies
on Suicide, Attempted Suicide, and Suicide Prevention,” Crisis, 16 (1995):
162–175; J. Hakanen and M. Upanne, “Evaluation Strategy for Finland’s
Suicide Prevention Project,” Crisis, 17 (1996): 167–174; S. J. Taylor, D.
Kingdom, and R. Jenkins, “How Are Nations Trying to Prevent Suicide?:
An Analysis of National Suicide Prevention Strategies,” Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 95 (1997): 457–463.
53 The World Health Organization: World Health Organization,
“Consultation on Strategies for Reducing Suicidal Behaviours in the
European Region: Summary Report” (Geneva: World Health Organization,
1990).
54 the United Kingdom: Secretary of State for Health, The Health of the
Nation: A Strategy for Health in England (London: HMSO, 1992).
55 The Royal College of Psychiatrists: E. S. Paykel, D. Hart, and R. G.
Priest, “Changes in Public Attitudes to Depression During the Defeat
Depression Campaign,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 173 (1998): 519–
522.
56 There is also in Britain: J. McKerrow, “Community Care for Mentally
Ill,” The Times (London), April 24, 1999.
57 “Resolved, That the Senate”: U.S. Senate, “Suicide in America,”
Congressional Record, 143(57) (1998): 1–2.
58 These groups were brought together: D. Satcher, “Bringing the Public
Health Approach to the Problem of Suicide,” Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behavior, 28 (1998): 325–327.
59 His 1999 Surgeon General’s Report: United States Public Health
Service, The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Prevent Suicide
(Washington, D.C., 1999).
60 Nor is major success: H. G. Morgan, “Suicide Prevention: Hazards in the
Fast Lane of Community Care,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 160 (1992):

149–153; M. Goldacre, V. Seagrott, and K. Hawton, “Suicide After
Discharge from Psychiatric Inpatient Care,” Lancet, 342 (1993): 283–286;
P. B. Mortensen and K. Juel, “Mortality and Causes of Death in First
Admitted Schizophrenic Patients,” British Journal of Psychiatry, 163
(1993): 183–189; A. Bass, “DMH Sees Increase in Deaths,” Boston Globe,
June 11, 1995; R. McKeon, “The Impact of Managed Care on Suicidal
Patients,” paper presented to the American Association of Suicidology
Annual Meeting, Bethesda, Md., April 1998; J. Rabinowitz, E. J. Bromet, J.
Lavelle, K. J. Severance, S. L. Zariello, and B. Rosen, “Relationship
Between Type of Insurance and Care During the Early Course of
Psychosis,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 155 (1998): 1392–1397; J. M.
Zito, D. J. Safer, S. dos Reis, and M. A. Riddle, “Racial Disparity in
Psychotropic Medications Prescribed for Youths with Medicaid Insurance
in Maryland,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 37 (1998): 179–184.
10 • A HALF-STITCHED SCAR
1 “less sharp”: A. Toynbee, A. K. Mant, N. Smart, J. Hinton, S. Yudkin, E.
Rhode, R. Heywood, and H. H. Price, Man’s Concern with Death (St.
Louis: McGraw-Hill, 1968), p. 271.
2 “The question of suicide”: E. R. Ellis and G. N. Allen, Traitor Within:
Our Suicide Problem (New York: Doubleday, 1961), p. 176.
3 Although it might seem otherwise: D. Shepherd and B. M. Barraclough,
“The Aftermath of Suicide,” British Medical Journal, 2 (1974): 600–603;
A. S. Demi, “Social Adjustment of Widows After a Sudden Death: Suicide
and Non-Suicide Survivors Compared,” Death Education, 8 (1984): 91–
111; L. G. Calhoun, C. B. Abernathy, and J. W. Selby, “The Rules of
Bereavement: Are Suicidal Deaths Different?” Journal of Community
Psychology, 14 (1986): 213–218; M. P. H. D. Cleiren, Adaptation After
Bereavement: A Comparative Study of the Aftermath of Death from Suicide,
Traffic Accident and Illness for Next of Kin (Leiden: DSWO Press, 1991);
B. B. Cohen, “Holocaust Survivors and the Crisis of Aging,” Families in
Society, 72 (1991): 226–231; M. P. H. D. Cleiren, “After the Loss:
Bereavement After Suicide and Other Types of Death,” in B. L. Mishara,
The Impact of Suicide (New York: Springer, 1995), pp. 7–39.
4 Friends and neighbors may or may not: L. G. Calhoun, J. W. Selby, and

M. E. Faulstich, “Reactions to the Parents of the Child Suicide: A Study of
Social Impressions,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 48
(1980): 535–536; L. G. Calhoun, J. W. Selby, and L. E. Selby, “The
Psychological Aftermath of Suicide: An Analysis of Current Evidence,”
Clinical Psychology Review, 2 (1982): 409–420.
5 one-third of family members report: M. I. Solomon, “The Bereaved and
the Stigma of Suicide,” Omega, 13 (1982–83): 377–387.
6 one in ten family members: S. Wallace, After Suicide (New York: Wiley,
1973); K. E. Rudestam, “Physical and Psychological Responses to Suicide
in the Family,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 45 (1977):
162–170.
7 “An equal number of parents”: M. Séguin, A. Lesage, and M. C. Kiely,
“Parental Bereavement After Suicide and Accident: A Comparative Study,”
Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 25 (1995): 489–498, p. 493.
8 “I’d wake up at night”: C. J. Van Dongen, “Agonizing Questioning:
Experiences of Survivors of Suicide Victims,” Nursing Research, 39
(1990): 224–229, pp. 226, 227.
9 Many fathers and mothers: A. Herzog and H. L. Resnick, “A Clinical
Study of Parental Response to Adolescent Death by Suicide with
Recommendations for Approaching Survivors,” British Journal of Social
Psychiatry, 3 (1969): 144–152; K. E. Rudestam, “Physical and
Psychological Responses to Suicide in the Family,” Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 45 (1977): 162–170; S. M. Vallente and C. L.
Halton, “Bereavement Group for Parents Who Suffered a Suicidal Loss of
an Adolescent or Youth,” Dépression et Suicide, (1981): 509–510; T. A.
Rando, “Bereaved Parents: Particular Difficulties, Unique Factors and
Treatment Issues,” Social Work (1985): 19–23.
10 Mothers in particular: D. A. Brent, G. Moritz, J. Bridge, J. Perper, and R.
Canobbio, “The Impact of Adolescent Suicide on Siblings and Parents: A
Longitudinal Follow-up,” Suicidal and Life-Threatening Behavior, 26
(1996): 253–259.
11 “During the past ten years”: I. M. Bolton, “Our Son Mitch,” in E. J.
Dunne, J. L. McIntosh, and K. Dunne-Maxim, eds., Suicide and Its
Aftermath (New York: W. W. Norton, 1987), pp. 85–94, p. 92.
12 “I don’t know why”: I. M. Bolton, My Son … My Son … : A Guide to
Healing After Death, Loss, or Suicide (Atlanta: Bolton Press, 1983).
13 relatively few long-term adverse: D. A. Brent, G. Moritz, J. Bridge, J.

Perper, and R. Canobbio, “The Impact of Adolescent Suicide on Siblings
and Parents.”
14 depression was common: D. A. Brent, J. A. Perper, G. Moritz, L. Liotus,
J. Schweers, C. Roth, L. Balach, and C. Allman, “Psychiatric Impact of the
Loss of an Adolescent Sibling to Suicide,” Journal of Affective Disorders,
28 (1993): 249–256.
15 Adolescents, when asked: D. Balk, “Adolescents’ Grief Reactions and
Self-Concept Perceptions Following Sibling Death,” Journal of Youth and
Adolescence, 12 (1983): 137–161.
16 “He never missed a year”: K. Dunne-Maxim, “Survivors and the Media:
Pitfalls and Potential,” in E. J. Dunne, J. L. McIntosh, and K. Dunne-
Maxim, eds., Suicide and Its Aftermath (New York: W. W. Norton, 1987),
pp. 45–56, p. 47.
17 “I had the strange feeling”: T. Organ, “Grief and the Art of Consolation:
A Personal Testimony,” The Christian Century, 96 (1979): 759–762; quoted
in J. L. McIntosh, “Survivor Family Relationships: Literature Review,” in
E. J. Dunne, J. L. McIntosh, and K. Dunne-Maxim, eds., Suicide and Its
Aftermath (New York: W. W. Norton, 1987), pp. 83–84.
18 long-term psychological outcome: A. C. Cain and I. Fast, “The Legacy
of Suicide: Observations on the Pathogenic Impact of Suicide upon Marital
Partners,” Psychiatry, 29 (1966): 406–411; D. Shepherd and B. M.
Barraclough, “The Aftermath of Suicide,” British Medical Journal, 15 June
1974: 600–603; A. S. Demi, “Social Adjustment of Widows After a Sudden
Death: Suicide and Non-Suicide Survivors Compared,” Death Education, 8
(Suppl.) (1984): 91–111; D. E. McNiel, C. Hatcher, and R. Reubin, “Family
Survivors of Suicide and Accidental Death: Consequences for Widows,”
Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 18 (1988): 137–148; T. W. Barrett
and T. B. Scott, “Suicide Bereavement and Recovery Patterns Compared
with Nonsuicide Bereavement Patterns,” Suicide and Life-Threatening
Behavior, 20 (1990): 1–15; M. P. H. D. Cleiren, O. Grad, A. Zavasnik, and
R. F. W. Diekstra, “Psychosocial Impact of Bereavement After Suicide and
Fatal Traffic Accident: A Comparative Two Country Study,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 94 (1996): 37–44.
19 “From the first moment”: J. Pesaresi, “When One of Us Is Gone,” in E.
J. Dunne, J. L. McIntosh, and K. Dunne-Maxim, eds., Suicide and Its
Aftermath (New York: W. W. Norton, 1987), pp. 104–108, pp. 105, 106.
20 “This thin, wan, passive boy”: A. C. Cain and I. Fast, “Children’s

Disturbed 
Reactions 
to 
Parent 
Suicide: 
Distortions 
of 
Guilt,
Communication, and Identification,” in A. C. Cain, ed., Survivors of
Suicide (Springfield, Ill.: Charles C. Thomas, 1972), pp. 93–111, p. 97.
21 “Mummy was very depressed”: D. M. Shepherd and B. M. Barraclough,
“The Aftermath of Parental Suicide for Children,” British Journal of
Psychiatry, 129 (1976): 267–276, p. 269.
22 “He had a sickness”: Pesaresi, “When One of Us Is Gone,” p. 104.
23 “On a hot August afternoon”: C. Lukas and H. M. Seiden, Silent Grief:
Living in the Wake of Suicide (Northvale, N.J.: Jason Aronson, 1997), pp.
3–4.
24 “In discussing my childhood”: J. Logan, Josh: My Up and Down, In and
Out Life (New York: Delacorte, 1976), pp. 386–387.
25 “Reflexions on suicide”: J. Berryman, “Of Suicide,” in C. Thornbury,
ed., John Berryman: Collected Poems 1937–1971, (New York, Noonday
Press, 1989, 1999), p. 206, ll. 1, 27.
26 “Save us from shotguns”: J. Berryman, “235,” in The Dream Songs
(New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1969), p. 254, ll. 7, 16–18.
27 “The marker slants, flowerless”: J. Berryman, “384,” in The Dream
Songs p. 406, ll. 1–8.
28 “Just as the last time”: Lewis Grassic Gibbon, Sunset Song (Edinburgh:
Canongate, 1988; first published 1932), pp. 63, 64.

EPILOGUE
1 “Look to the living”: Douglas Dunn, “Disenchantments,” in D. Dunn,
Dante’s Drum-kit (London: Faber and Faber, 1993), p. 46.

Acknowledgments
I AM INDEBTED to many people for their help during the writing of this book. Drew
Sopirak’s parents, Andrew and Allyn, allowed me access to his medical records;
talked with me and wrote to me at length about his life and death; shared his
writings, drawings, photographs, and books; and encouraged me to talk with his
high school friends and teachers, as well as his instructors and fellow cadets
from the U.S. Air Force Academy. To the following people I owe my
appreciation for their time, interviews, letters, and memories: Lt. Colonel Philip
Bossert, Jr., Tom Buckley, Tam Bui, Ellen Fitzgerald, Dr. Joseph Galema, Judy
Landis, Janna Mattey, Major Stephen Pluntze, Lt. David Shoemaker, Paul and
Kay Spangler, Kerri Whittaker, and Stephen Wood.
The staff of the National Institutes of Health Library were particularly helpful
in tracking down the scientific and clinical literature on suicide. I also used
extensively the William H. Welch Medical Library of the Johns Hopkins School
of Medicine, Georgetown University Library, the University of St. Andrews
Library, the London Library (which files its books about suicide on the “Science
and Miscellaneous” shelves between “Sugar” and “Sundials”), and the National
Gallery of Art Library in Washington, D.C. Mildred L. Amer, who is with the
Congressional Research Service of the Library of Congress, assisted in locating
information about U.S. Congressmen who died of other than natural causes. Mrs.
J. M. Buckberry, Librarian and Archivist of the Royal Air Force College in
England, sent me material about the history and literature of aviation.
Dr. Alex Crosby, with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in
Atlanta; Dr. Eve Mościcki, from the epidemiology branch of the National
Institute of Mental Health; and Ken Kochanek, M.A., with the Mortality Branch
of the National Center for Health Statistics, were very helpful in providing me
with up-to-date suicide statistics. Dr. Robert Gallo and Dr. Farley Cleghorn, with
the Institute of Virology at the University of Maryland, and Dr. Harry
Rosenberg, Chief of the Mortality Statistics Branch of the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, provided AIDS mortality statistics. Tom Campbell and
Roger Jorstad in the Department of Defense sent me Vietnam War mortality
data. Broadcast journalist Paul Berry provided me with background information
and videotape footage about his friend John Wilson, the former chairman of the
D.C. Council.

Many of my colleagues, along with other individuals, were kind enough to
send me manuscripts or works-in-progress; others shared new data, illustrations,
or opinions about ongoing research protocols. I am indebted to Dr. Eileen
Ahearn, Duke University Medical Center; Dr. Marie Åsberg, the Karolinska
Institute in Stockholm; Dr. Susan Bachus, the Clinical Brain Disorders Branch of
the National Institute of Mental Health; Dr. Aaron Beck, University of
Pennsylvania; Dr. Lanny Berman, American Association of Suicidology;
Virginia Betts, R.N., J.D., in the U.S. Surgeon General’s office; Dr. Emil
Coccaro, University of Chicago; Dr. Francis Collins and his staff at the National
Human Genome Research Institute; Dr. Jerry Cott, National Institute of Mental
Health; Dr. Joseph Coyle, Harvard Medical School; Dr. Lucy Davidson, Emory
University School of Medicine; Lamia Doumato, National Gallery of Art; Karen
Dunne-Maxim, R.N.; Colonel Molly Hall, U.S. Air Force; Dr. Dan Herman,
New York Psychiatric Institute; Dr. Herb Hendin, New York Medical College
and the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention; Dr. Joseph Hibbeln,
Laboratory of Membrane Biochemistry and Biophysics, National Institute on
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism; Dr. J. Dee Higley, Primate Unit, National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism; Liz Hylton, the Washington Post;
Dr. Steven Hyman, National Institute of Mental Health; Dr. Joanne Leslie,
UCLA School of Public Health; Dr. John Mann, Columbia University; the
Viscount Norwich; Dr. Barbara Parry, University of Calilfornia, San Diego; Dr.
Alec Roy, Veteran Affairs Medical Center, New Jersey; Dr. David Rubinow,
National Institute of Mental Health; Dr. Donald Rubenstein, Stanford University
and the University of Guam; Dr. Matthew Rudorfer, National Institute of Mental
Health; Dr. David Shaffer, Columbia University; Dr. John Smialek, Chief
Medical Examiner for the State of Maryland; Dr. Michael Sopher, UCLA
Department of Anesthesiology; David Sturtevant, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston;
Dr. Ezra Susser, New York Psychiatric Institute; Ian Tattersall, American
Museum of Natural History; Dr. E. Fuller Torrey, the Stanley Foundation; Dr.
Tom Wehr, National Institute of Mental Health; Dr. Myrna Weissman, Columbia
University; and Dr. Peter Whybrow, UCLA School of Medicine.
I am deeply appreciative to my colleagues who carefully reviewed my
manuscript and offered numerous and very helpful suggestions: Dr. Samuel
Barondes, University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine; Dr. Lucy
Davidson, Emory University School of Medicine; Dr. Ellen Frank, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine; Dr. Dean Jamison, UCLA School of Public
Health; Dr. David Kupfer, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine; Dr. John
Mann, Columbia University, College of Physicians and Surgeons; Dr. Charles
Nemeroff, Emory University School of Medicine; Dr. Norman Rosenthal,

National Institute of Mental Health; and Dr. Anthony Storr of Oxford, England.
I am particularly grateful to the following people for their friendship and
support: Dr. Daniel Auerbach, David Mahoney, Dr. Anthony Storr, Dr. and Mrs.
James Ballenger, Robert Boorstin, Lucie Bryant, Dr. Raymond De Paulo and my
other colleagues at Johns Hopkins, Professor Douglas Dunn, Dr. Robert Faguet
and Dr. Kay Faguet, Antonello and Christina Fanna, Mrs. Katharine Graham,
Charles and Gwenda Hyman, Earl and Helen Kindle, Dr. Athanasio
Koukopoulos, Senator George McGovern, Dr. Paul McHugh, Alain Moreau,
Clarke and Wendy Oler, Victor and Harriet Potik, Senator Robert Packwood, Dr.
Norman Rosenthal, Dr. Per Vestergaard, Dr. Jeremy Waletzky, Dr. and Mrs.
James Watson, and Professor Robert Winter. During a difficult time, Senator
Orrin Hatch extended kindness and his friendship, which has meant a great deal
to me. So too has the friendship of songwriter Mickey Newbury, whose words
and music have been a sad and lovely thread throughout my life for thirty years.
Carol Janeway, my editor at Alfred A. Knopf, has been remarkable, and I
cannot imagine that I could have had the privilege of working with anyone
better. Stephanie Katz, also at Knopf, has been enormously helpful. I am
indebted, as well, to Paul Bogaards and William Loverd at Knopf, and to my
agent, Maxine Groffsky. William Collins, who has typed all of my manuscripts,
has been simply wonderful. Silas Jones has helped me on a nearly daily basis,
and I am deeply grateful to him for everything he has done to make my life
easier.
As always, I owe my family everything: my mother, Dell Jamison; my father,
Marshall Jamison; Danica and Kelda Jamison; Joanne Leslie; Julian, Eliot, and
Leslie Jamison; Kin Bing Wu; and my brother, Dean Jamison.
My husband, Richard Wyatt, encouraged me to write this book, read every
chapter as I wrote it, and made excellent scientific and clinical suggestions. He
understood that the book was not an easy one to write, and he could not have
been more loving or supportive. I am very fortunate.

PERMISSIONS ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Grateful acknowledgment is made to the following for permission to reprint
previously published material:
American Psychological Association: Figure 6, page 133, and Figure 7, page
134, from Adolescent Suicide by A. L. Berman and D. A. Jobes, copyright ©
1991 by the American Psychological Association. Reprinted by permission of
the American Psychological Association.
Ardis Publishers: Excerpt from poem by Sergei Esenin in Esenin: A Life by
Gordon McVay. Reprinted by permission of Ardis Publishers.
Elizabeth Barnett, Literary Executor, Edna St. Vincent Millay Society: Excerpt
from “Not So Far as the Forest (I)” and “From a Very Little Sphinx (IV)” in
Collected Poems by Edna St. Vincent Millay (New York: HarperCollins
Publishers), copyright © 1929, 1939, 1956, 1967 by Edna St. Vincent Millay and
Norma Millay Ellis. All rights reserved. Reprinted by permission of Elizabeth
Barnett, Literary Executor, Edna St. Vincent Millay Society.
Bolton Press Atlanta: Poem by Iris M. Bolton from My Son … My Son by Iris M.
Bolton (Bolton Press Atlanta, 1983, 1991). Reprinted by permission of Bolton
Press Atlanta.
Canongate Books: Excerpt from Sunset Song by Lewis Grassic Gibbon
(Canongate Classics, imprint of Canongate Books, 1995). Reprinted by
permission of Canongate Books, Edinburgh EH1 1TE, United Kingdom.
Chatto & Windus: Excerpt from “An Academic” from Collected Poems by
Norman MacCaig. Reprinted by permission of Chatto & Windus, an imprint of
The Random House Group Ltd., on behalf of the Estate of Norman MacCaig.
Delacorte Press: Excerpt from Josh: My Up and Down, In and Out Life by
Joshua L. Logan, copyright © 1976 by Joshua L. Logan. Reprinted by
permission of Delacorte Press, a division of Random House, Inc.
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, LLC: 4 lines from “#235” and 8 lines from “#384”
from The Dream Songs by John Berryman, copyright © 1969 by John Berryman,
copyright renewed 1997 by Kate Donahue Berryman; excerpt from “Suicide”
from Day by Day by Robert Lowell, copyright © 1977 by Robert Lowell.

Reprinted by permission of Farrar, Straus and Giroux, LLC.
Carl Fischer Music: Excerpt from the lyric “The U.S. Air Force” by Robert
Crawford, copyright © 1939, 1942, 1951 by Carl Fischer LLC. All rights
reserved. Reprinted by permission of Carl Fischer Music.
Harcourt, Inc.: Excerpts from The Letters of Virginia Woolf, Volume VI: 1936–
1941 by Nigel Nicolson and Joanne Trautmann, copyright © 1980 by Quentin
Bell and Angelica Garnett. Reprinted by permission of Harcourt, Inc.
Houghton Mifflin Company and Sterling Lord Literistic, Inc.: Excerpt from “To
a Friend Whose Work Has Come to Triumph” from All My Pretty Ones by Anne
Sexton, copyright © 1962 by Anne Sexton, copyright renewed 1990 by Linda G.
Sexton. All rights reserved. Reprinted by permission of Houghton Mifflin
Company and Sterling Lord Literistic, Inc.
Alfred A. Knopf and Harold Ober Associates Incorporated: “Suicide Note” from
Collected Poems by Langston Hughes, copyright © 1994 by the Estate of
Langston Hughes. Reprinted by permission of Alfred A. Knopf and Harold Ober
Associates Incorporated.
New Directions Publishing Corp. and David Higham Associates Limited: 3 lines
from “The Force That Through the Green Fuse Drives the Flower” by Dylan
Thomas from The Poems of Dylan Thomas, copyright © 1939 by New
Directions Publishing Corp. Rights outside the United States from Collected
Poems by Dylan Thomas (J. M. Dent), administered by David Higham
Associates Limited, London. Reprinted by permission of New Directions
Publishing Corp. and David Higham Associates Limited.
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.: “When One of Us Is Gone” by Josephine
Pesaresi from Suicide and Its Aftermath: Understanding and Counseling the
Survivors, edited by Edward J. Dunne, John L. McIntosh, Karen Dunne-Maxim,
copyright © 1987 by Edward J. Dunne, John L. McIntosh, Karen Dunne-Maxim.
Reprinted by permission of W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
Sheil Land Associates Ltd.: Excerpt from A Voice That Thunders by Alan Garner
(London: The Harvill Press), copyright © 1997 by Alan Garner. Reprinted by
permission of Sheil Land Associates Ltd.
Viking Penguin: “Résumé” from The Portable Dorothy Parker by Dorothy

Parker, copyright © 1926, 1928, copyright renewed 1954, 1956 by Dorothy
Parker. Reprinted by permission of Viking Penguin, a division of Penguin
Putnam Inc.
The Washington Post Writers Group: Excerpt from “A Bridge He Could Not
Cross” by Peter Perl (The Washington Post Magazine, Nov. 14, 1993), copyright
© 1993 by The Washington Post. Reprinted by permission of The Washington
Post Writers Group.
A. P. Watt Ltd.: Excerpt from “An Irish Airman Foresees His Death” by W. B.
Yeats. Reprinted by permission of A. P. Watt Ltd. on behalf of Michael B. Yeats.

A NOTE ABOUT THE AUTHOR
KAY REDFIELD JAMISON is Professor of Psychiatry at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, as well
as Honorary Professor of English at the University of St. Andrews in Scotland. She is the author of the
national best-seller An Unquiet Mind: A Memoir of Moods and Madness and coauthor of the standard
medical text on manic-depressive illness. She is also the author of Touched with Fire: Manic-Depressive
Illness and the Artistic Temperament, as well as more than a hundred scientific papers about mood
disorders, psychotherapy, psychopharmacology, and suicide. Dr. Jamison, formerly the director of the
UCLA Affective Disorders Clinic, is the recipient of numerous national and international scientific awards,
including the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention’s Research Award. She lives in Washington,
D.C., with her husband, Richard Wyatt, a physician and scientist at the National Institutes of Health.
